
How We Think
                                 Jone Dewey
Part One: The Problem of Training Thought
                                                  Chapter 1: What is Thought
                                              ? I. Varied Senses of the Term
Four senses of thought, from the wider to the limited
  No words are oftener on our lips than thinking and thought. So profuse and
varied, indeed, is our use of these words that it is not easy to define
just what we mean by them. The aim of this chapter is to find a single
consistent meaning. Assistance may be had by considering some typical ways
in which the terms are employed. In the first place thought is used
broadly, not to say loosely. Everything that comes to mind, that "goes
through our heads," is called a thought. To think of a thing is just to be
conscious of it in any way whatsoever. Second, the term is restricted by
excluding whatever is directly presented; we think (or think of) only such
things as we do not directly see, hear, smell, or taste. Then, third, the
meaning is further limited to beliefs that rest upon some kind of evidence
or testimony. Of this third type, two kinds ― or, rather, two degrees ―
must be discriminated. In some cases, a belief is accepted with slight or
almost no attempt to state the grounds that support it. In other cases, the
ground or basis for a belief is deliberately sought and its
[pic]
(2) adequacy to support the belief examined. This process is called
reflective thought; it alone is truly educative in value, and it forms,
accordingly, the principal subject of this volume. We shall now briefly
describe each of the four senses.
  Chance and idle thinking
  1. In its loosest sense, thinking signifies everything that, as we say, is
"in our heads " or that "goes through our minds." He who offers "a penny
for your thoughts" does not expect to drive any great bargain. In calling
the objects of his demand thoughts, he does not intend to ascribe to them
dignity, consecutiveness, or truth. Any idle fancy, trivial recollection,
or flitting impression will satisfy his demand. Daydreaming, building of
castles in the air, that loose flux of casual and disconnected material
that floats through our minds in relaxed moments are, in this random sense,
thinking. More of our waking life than we should care to admit, even to
ourselves, is likely to be whiled away in this inconsequential trifling
with idle fancy and unsubstantial hope.
  Reflective thought is consecutive, not merely a sequence
  In this sense, silly folk and dullards think. The story is told of a man
in slight repute for intelligence, who, desiring to be chosen selectman in
his New England town, addressed a knot of neighbors in this wise: "I hear
you don't believe I know enough to hold office. I wish you to understand
that I am thinking about something or other most of the time." Now
reflective thought is like this random coursing of things through the mind
in that it consists of a succession of things thought of ; but it is
unlike, in that the mere chance occurrence of any chance "something or
other" in an irregular sequence does not suffice. Reflection involves not
simply a sequence of ideas, but a consequence ― a consecutive ordering in
such a way that
[pic]
(3) each determines the next as its proper outcome, while each in turn
leans back on its predecessors. The successive portions of the reflective
thought grow out of one another and support one another; they do not come
and go in a medley. Each phase is a step from something to something ―
technically speaking, it is a term of thought. Each term leaves a deposit
which is utilized in the next term. The stream or flow becomes a train,
chain, or thread.
  The restriction of thinking to what goes beyond direct observation
  Reflective thought aims, however, at belief
  II. Even when thinking is used in a broad sense, it is usually restricted
to matters not directly perceived: to what we do not see, smell, hear, or
touch. We ask the man telling a story if he saw a certain incident happen,
and his reply may be, " No, I only thought of it." A note of invention, as
distinct from faithful record of observation, is present. Most important in
this class are successions of imaginative incidents and episodes which,
having a certain coherence, hanging together on a continuous thread, lie
between kaleidoscopic flights of fancy and considerations deliberately
employed to establish a conclusion. The imaginative stories poured forth by
children possess all degrees of internal congruity; some are disjointed,
some are articulated. When connected, they simulate reflective thought;
indeed, they usually occur in minds of logical capacity. These imaginative
enterprises often precede thinking of the close-knit type and prepare the
way for it. But they do not aim at knowledge, at belief about facts or in
truths ; and thereby they are marked off from reflective thought even when
they most resemble it. Those who express such thoughts do not expect
credence, but rather credit for a well-constructed plot or a well-arranged
climax. They produce good stories, not ― unless by chance ―
[pic]
(4)  knowledge. Such thoughts are an efflorescence of feeling; the
enhancement of a mood or sentiment is their aim; congruity of emotion,
their binding tie.
  Thought Induces belief in two ways
  III. In its next sense, thought denotes belief resting upon some basis,
that is, real or supposed knowledge going beyond what is directly present.
It is marked by acceptance or rejection of something as reasonably probable
or improbable. This phase of thought, however, includes two such distinct
types of belief that, even though their difference is strictly one of
degree, not of kind, it becomes practically important to consider them
separately. Some beliefs are accepted when their grounds have not
themselves been considered, others are accepted because their grounds have
been examined.
  When we say, " Men used to think the world was flat," or, I thought you
went by the house," we express belief something is accepted, held to,
acquiesced in, or affirmed. But such thoughts may mean a supposition
accepted without reference to its real grounds. These may be adequate, they
may not; but their value with reference to the support they afford the
belief has not been considered.
  Such thoughts grow up unconsciously and without reference to the
attainment of correct belief. They are picked up ― we know not how. From
obscure sources and by unnoticed channels they insinuate themselves into
acceptance and become unconsciously a part of our mental furniture.
Tradition, instruction, imitation ― all of which depend upon authority in
some form, or appeal to our own advantage, or fall in with a strong passion
― are responsible for them. Such thoughts are prejudices, that is,
prejudgments, not
[pic]
(5) judgments proper that rest upon a survey of evidence.[1]
  Thinking in its best sense is that which considers the basis and
consequences of belief
  IV. Thoughts that result in belief have an importance I attached to them
which leads to reflective thought to conscious inquiry into the nature,
conditions, and bearings of the belief. To think of whales and camels in
the clouds is to entertain ourselves with fancies, terminable at our
pleasure, which do not lead to any belief in particular. But to think of
the world as flat is to ascribe a quality to a real thing as its real
property. This conclusion denotes a connection among things and hence is
not, like imaginative thought, plastic to our mood. Belief in the world's
flatness commits him who holds it to thinking in certain specific ways of
other objects, such as the heavenly bodies, antipodes, the possibility of
navigation. It prescribes to him actions in accordance with his conception
of these objects.
  The consequences of a belief upon other beliefs and upon behavior may be
so important, then, that men are forced to consider the grounds or reasons
of their belief and its logical consequences. This means reflective thought
-thought in its eulogistic and emphatic sense.
  Men thought the world was flat until Columbus thought it to be round. The
earlier thought was a belief held because men had not the energy or the
courage to question what those about them accepted and taught, especially
as it was suggested and seemingly confirmed by obvious sensible facts. The
thought of Columbus was a reasoned conclusion. It marked the close of study
into facts, of scrutiny and revision of evidence, of working out the
implications of various hypotheses, and of
[pic]
  Reflective thought defined
  (6) comparing these theoretical results with one another and with known
facts. acts. Because Columbus did not accept unhesitatingly the current
traditional theory, because he doubted and inquired, he arrived at his
thought. Skeptical of what, from long habit, seemed most certain, and
credulous of what seemed impossible, he went on thinking until he could
produce evidence for both his confidence and his disbelief. Even if his
conclusion had finally turned out wrong, it would have been a different
sort of belief from those it antagonized, because it was reached by a
different method. Active, persistent, and careful consideration of any
belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds that
support it, and the further conclusions to which it tends, constitutes
reflective thought. Any one of the first three kinds of thought may elicit
this type; but once begun, it is a conscious and voluntary effort to
establish belief upon a firm basis of reasons.
                                          ? 2.The Central Factor in Thinking
  There is a common element in all types of thought:
  There are, however, no sharp lines of demarcation between the various
operations just outlined. The problem of attaining correct habits of
reflection would be much easier than it is, did not the different modes of
thinking blend insensibly into one another. So far, we have considered
rather extreme instances of each kind in order to get the field clearly
before us. Let us now reverse this operation; let us consider a rudimentary
case of thinking, lying between careful examination of evidence and a mere
irresponsible stream of fancies. A man is walking on a warm day. The sky
was clear the last time he observed it; but presently be notes, while
occupied primarily with other things, that the air is cooler. It occurs to
him that it is probably going to
[pic]
(7) rain; looking up, he sees a dark cloud between him and the sun, and he
then quickens his steps. What, if anything, in such a situation can be
called thought? Neither the act of walking nor the noting of the cold is a
thought. Walking is one direction of activity; looking and noting are other
modes of activity. The likelihood that it will rain is, however, something
suggested. The pedestrian feels the cold ; he thinks of clouds and a coming
shower.
  viz. suggestion of something not observed.
  But reflection involves also the relation of signifying
  So far there is the same sort of situation as when one looking at a cloud
is reminded of a human figure and face. Thinking in both of these cases
(the cases of belief and of fancy) involves a noted or perceived fact,
followed by something else which is not observed but which is brought to
mind, suggested by the thing seen. One reminds us, as we say, of the other.
Side by side, however, with this factor of agreement in the two cases of
suggestion is a factor of marked disagreement. We do not believe in the
face suggested by the cloud; we do not consider at all the probability of
its being a fact. There is no reflective thought. The danger of rain, on
the contrary, presents itself to us as a genuine possibility -as a possible
fact of the same nature as the observed coolness. Put differently, we do
not regard the cloud as meaning or indicating a face, but merely as
suggesting it, while we do consider that the coolness may mean rain. In the
first case, seeing an object, we just happen, as we say, to think of
something else; in the second, we consider the possibility and nature of
the connection between the object seen and the object suggested. The seen
thing is regarded as in some way the ground or basis of belief in the
suggested thing; it possesses the quality of evidence.
[pic]
  Various synonymous expressions for the function of signifying
(8)This function by which one thing signifies or indicates another, and
thereby leads us to consider how far one may be regarded as warrant for
belief in the other, is, then, the central factor in all reflective or
distinctively intellectual thinking. By calling up various situations to
which such terms as signifies and indicates apply, the student will best
realize for himself the actual facts denoted by the words reflective
thought. Synonyms for these terms are: points to, tells of, betokens,
prognosticates, represents, stands for, implies.[2] We also say one thing
portends another; is ominous of another, or a symptom of it, or a key to
it, or (if the connection is quite obscure) that it gives a hint, clue, or
intimation.
  Reflection and belief on evidence
  Reflection thus implies that something is believed in or disbelieved in),
not on its own direct account, but through something else which stands as
witness, evidence, proof, voucher, warrant; that is, as ground of belief.
At one time, rain is actually felt or directly experienced; at another
time, we infer that it has rained from the looks of the grass and trees, or
that it is going to rain because of the condition of the air or the state
of the barometer. At one time, we see a man (or suppose we do) without any
intermediary fact; at another time, we are not quite sure what we see, and
hunt for accompanying facts that will serve as signs, indications, tokens
of what is to be believed.
  Thinking, for the purposes of this inquiry, is defined accordingly as that
operation in which present facts suggest other facts (or truths) in such a
way as to induce be-
[pic]
(9) -lief in the latter upon the ground or warrant of the former. We do not
put beliefs that rest simply on inference on the surest level of assurance.
To say " I think so " implies that I do not as yet know so. The inferential
belief may later be confirmed and come to stand as sure, but in itself it
always has a certain element of supposition.
  ? 3. Elements in Reflective Thinking
  So much for the description of the more external and obvious aspects of
the fact called thinking. Further consideration at once reveals certain
subprocesses which are involved in every reflective operation. These are:
(a) a state of perplexity, hesitation, doubt; and (b) an act of search or
investigation directed toward bringing to light further facts which serve
to corroborate or to nullify the suggested belief.
  The importance of uncertainty
  (a) In our illustration, the shock of coolness generated confusion and
suspended belief, at least momentarily. Because it was unexpected, it was a
shock or an interruption needing to be accounted for, identified, or
placed. To say that the abrupt occurrence of the change of temperature
constitutes a problem may sound forced and artificial; but if we are
willing to extend the meaning of the word problem to whatever ― no matter
how slight and commonplace in character ― perplexes and challenges the mind
so that it makes belief at all uncertain, there is a genuine problem or
question involved in this experience of sudden change.
  and of inquiry in order to test
  (b) The turning of the head, the lifting of the eyes, the scanning of the
heavens, are activities adapted to bring to recognition facts that will
answer the question presented by the sudden coolness. The facts as they
[pic]
(10) first presented themselves were perplexing; they suggested, however,
clouds. The act of looking was an act to discover if this suggested
explanation held good. It may again seem forced to speak of this looking,
almost automatic, as an act of research or inquiry. But once more, if we
are willing to generalize our conceptions of our mental operations to
include the trivial and ordinary as well as the technical and recondite,
there is no good reason for refusing to give such a title to the act of
looking. The purport of this act of inquiry is to confirm or to refute the
suggested belief. New facts are brought to perception, which either
corroborate the idea that a change of weather is imminent, or negate it.
  Finding one's way an illustration of reflection
  Another instance, commonplace also, yet not quite so trivial, may enforce
this lesson. A man traveling in an unfamiliar region comes to a branching
of the roads. Having no sure knowledge to fall back upon, he is brought to
a standstill of hesitation and suspense. Which road is right? And how shall
perplexity be resolved? There are but two alternatives: he must either
blindly and arbitrarily take his course, trusting to luck for the outcome,
or he must discover grounds for the conclusion that a given road is right.
Any attempt to decide the matter by thinking will involve inquiry into
other facts, whether brought out by memory or by further observation, or by
both. The perplexed wayfarer must carefully scrutinize what is before him
and he must cudgel his memory. He looks for evidence that will support
belief in favor of either of the roads -for evidence that will weight down
one suggestion. He may climb a tree; he may go first in this direction,
then in that, looking, in either case, for signs, clues,
[pic]
(11) indications. He wants something in the nature of a signboard or a map,
and his reflection is aimed at the discovery of facts that will serve this
purpose.
  Possible, yet incompatible, suggestions
  The above illustration may be generalized. Thinking begins in what may
fairly enough be called a forked- road situation, a situation which is
ambiguous, which presents a dilemma, which proposes alternatives. As long
as our activity glides smoothly along from one thing to another, or as long
as we permit our imagination to entertain fancies at pleasure, there is no
call for reflection. Difficulty or obstruction in the way of reaching a
belief brings us, however, to a pause. In the suspense of uncertainty, we
metaphorically climb a tree; we try to find some standpoint from which we
may survey additional facts and, getting a more commanding view of the
situation, may decide how the facts stand related to one another.
  Regulation of thinking by its purpose
  Demand for the solution of a perplexity is the steadying and guiding
factor in the entire process of reflection. Where there is no question of a
problem to be solved or a difficulty to be surmounted, the course of
suggestions flows on at random; we have the first type of thought
described. If the stream of suggestions is controlled simply by their
emotional congruity, their fitting agreeably into a single picture or
story, we have the second type. But a question to be answered, an ambiguity
to be resolved, sets up an end and holds the current of ideas to a definite
channel. Every suggested conclusion is tested by its reference to this
regulating end, by its pertinence to the problem in band. This need of
straightening out a perplexity also controls the kind of inquiry
undertaken. A traveler whose end is the most beautiful path will look for
other considerations and
[pic]
(12) will test suggestions occurring to him on another principle than if he
wishes to discover the way to a given city. The problem fixes the end of
thought and the end controls the process of thinking.
  ? 4. Summary
  Origin and stimulus
  We may recapitulate by saying that the origin of thinking is some
perplexity, confusion, or doubt. Thinking is not a case of spontaneous
combustion; it does not occur just on " general principles." There is
something specific which occasions and evokes it. General appeals to a
child (or to a grown-up) to think, irrespective of the existence in his own
experience of some difficulty that troubles him and disturbs his
equilibrium, are as futile as advice to lift himself by his boot-straps.
  Suggestion and past experience
  Given a difficulty, the next step is suggestion of some way out-the
formation of some tentative plan or project, the entertaining of some
theory which will account for the peculiarities in question, the
consideration of some solution for the problem. The -data at hand cannot
supply the solution; they can only suggest it. What, then, are the sources
of the suggestion ? Clearly past experience and prior knowledge. If the
person has had some acquaintance with similar situations, if he has dealt
with material of the same sort before, suggestions more or less apt and
helpful are likely to arise. But unless there has been experience in some
degree analogous, which may now be represented in imagination, confusion
remains mere confusion. There is nothing upon which to draw in order to
clarify it. Even when a child (or a grown-up) has a problem, to urge him to
think when be has no prior experiences involving some of the same
conditions, is wholly futile.
[pic]
  Exploration and testing
(13) If the suggestion that occurs is at once accepted, we have uncritical
thinking, the minimum of reflection. To turn the thing over in mind, to
reflect, means to hunt for additional evidence, for new data, that will
develop the suggestion, and will either, as we say, bear it out or else
make obvious its absurdity and irrelevance. Given a genuine difficulty and
a reasonable amount of analogous experience to draw upon, the difference,
par excellence, between good and bad thinking is found at this point. The
easiest way is to accept any suggestion that seems plausible and thereby
bring to an end the condition of mental uneasiness. Reflective thinking is
always more or less troublesome because it involves overcoming the inertia
that inclines one to accept suggestions at their face value; it involves
willingness to endure a condition of mental unrest and disturbance.
Reflective thinking, in short, means judgment suspended during further
inquiry; and suspense is likely to be somewhat painful. As we shall see
later, the most important factor in the training of good mental habits
consists in acquiring the attitude of suspended conclusion, and in
mastering the various methods of searching for new materials to corroborate
or to refute the first suggestions that occur. To maintain the state of
doubt and to carry on systematic and protracted inquiry ― these are the
essentials of thinking.
                                                                       Notes
     1. This mode of thinking in its contrast with thoughtful inquiry
        receives special notice in the next chapter.
     2. Implies is more often used when a principle or general truth brings
        about belief in some other truth; the other phrases are more
        frequently used to denote the cases in which one fact or event leads
        us to believe in something else.
                                    Chapter 2: The Need for Training Thought
Man the animal that thinks
  To expatiate upon the importance of thought would be absurd. The
traditional definition of man as "the thinking animal " fixes thought as
the essential difference between man and the brutes, ―surely an important
matter. More relevant to our purpose is the question how thought is
important, for an answer to this question will throw light upon the kind of
training thought requires if it is to subserve its end.
                                                  ? I. The Values of Thought
  The possibility of deliberate and intentional activity
  1. Thought affords the sole method of escape from purely impulsive or
purely routine action. A being without capacity for thought is moved only
by instincts and appetites, as these are called forth by outward conditions
and by the inner state of the organism. A being thus moved is, as it were,
pushed from behind. This is what we mean by the blind nature of brute
actions. The agent does not see or foresee the end for which he is acting,
nor the results produced by his behaving in one way rather than in another.
He does not " know what he is about." Where there is thought, things
present act as signs or tokens of things not yet experienced. A thinking
being can, accordingly, act on the basis of the absent and the future.
Instead of being pushed into a mode of action by the sheer urgency of
forces, whether
[pic]
(15) instincts or habits, of which he is not aware, a reflective agent is
drawn (to some extent at least) to action by some remoter object of which
he is indirectly aware.
  Natural events come to be a language
  An animal without thought may go into its hole when rain threatens,
because of some immediate stimulus to its organism. A thinking agent will
perceive that certain given facts are probable signs of a future rain, and
will take steps in the light of this anticipated future. To plant seeds, to
cultivate the soil, to harvest grain, are intentional acts, possible only
to a being who has learned to subordinate the immediately felt elements of
an experience to those values which these hint at and prophesy.
Philosophers have made much of the phrases "book of nature," "language of
nature." Well, it is in virtue of the capacity of thought that given things
are significant of absent things, and that nature speaks a language which
may be interpreted. To a being who thinks, things are records of their
past, as fossils tell of the prior history of the earth, and are prophetic
of their future, as from the present positions of heavenly bodies remote
eclipses are foretold. Shakespeare's " tongues in trees, books in the
running brooks," expresses literally enough the power superadded to
existences when they appeal to a thinking being. Upon the function of
signification depend all foresight, all intelligent planning, deliberation,
and calculation.
  The possibility of systematizing foresight
  II. By thought man also develops and arranges artificial signs to remind
him in advance of consequences, and of ways of securing and avoiding them.
As the trait just mentioned makes the difference between savage man and
brute, so this trait makes the difference between civilized man and savage.
A savage who has been shipwrecked in a river may note certain things which
[pic]
(16) serve him as signs of danger in the future. But civilized man
deliberately makes such signs; he sets up in advance of wreckage warning
buoys, and builds lighthouses where he sees signs that such events may
occur. A savage reads weather signs with great expertness; civilized man
institutes a weather service by which signs are artificially secured and
information is distributed in advance of the appearance of any signs that
could be detected without special methods. A savage finds his way
skillfully through a wilderness by reading certain obscure indications;
civilized man builds a highway which shows the road to all. The savage
learns to detect the signs of fire and thereby to invent methods of
producing flame; civilized man invents permanent conditions for producing
light and heat whenever they are needed. The very essence of civilized
culture is that we deliberately erect monuments and memorials, lest we
forget; and deliberately institute, in advance of the happening of various
contingencies and emergencies of life, devices for detecting their approach
and registering their nature, for warding off what is unfavorable, or at
least for protecting ourselves from its full impact and for making more
secure and extensive what is favorable. All forms of artificial apparatus
are intentionally designed modifications of natural things in order that
they may serve better than in their natural estate to indicate the hidden,
the absent, and the remote.
  The possibility of objects rich in quality
  III. Finally, thought confers upon physical events and objects a very
different status and value from that which they possess to a being that
does not reflect. These words are mere scratches, curious variations of
light and shade, to one to whom they are not linguistic signs. To him for
whom they are signs of other things,
[pic]
(17) each has a definite individuality of its own, according to the meaning
that it is used to convey. Exactly the same holds of natural objects. A
chair is a different object to a being to whom it consciously suggests an
opportunity f or sitting down, repose, or sociable converse, from what it
is to one to whom it presents itself merely as a thing to be smelled, or
gnawed, or jumped over; a stone is different to one who knows something of
its past history and its future use from what it is to one who only feels
it directly through his senses. It is only by courtesy, indeed, that we can
say that an unthinking animal experiences an object at all ―so largely is
anything that presents itself to us as an object made up by the qualities
it possesses as a sign of other things.
  The nature of the objects an animal perceives
  An English logician (Mr. Venn) has remarked that it may be questioned
whether a dog sees a rainbow any more than he apprehends the political
constitution of the country in which he lives. The same principle applies
to the kennel in which he sleeps and the meat that he eats. When he is
sleepy, he goes to the kennel; when he is hungry, he is excited by the
smell and color of meat; beyond this, in what sense does he see an object ?
Certainly he does not see a house ― i.e. a thing with all the properties
and relations of a permanent residence, unless he is capable of making what
is present a uniform sign of what is absent ― unless he is capable of
thought. Nor does he see what he eats as meat unless it suggests the absent
properties by virtue of which it is a certain joint of some animal, and is
known to afford nourishment. just what is left of an object stripped of all
such qualities of meaning, we cannot well say; but we can be sure that the
object is then a very different sort of thing from the objects that we
perceive. There
[pic]
(18) is moreover no particular limit to the possibilities of growth in the
fusion of a thing as it is to sense and as it is to thought, or as a sign
of other things. The child today soon regards as constituent parts of
objects qualities that once it required the intelligence of a Copernicus or
a Newton to apprehend.
  Mill on the business of life and the occupation of mind
  These various values of the power of thought may be summed up in the
following quotation from John Stuart Mill. " To draw inferences," he says,
" has been said to be the great business of life. Every one has daily,
hourly, and momentary need of ascertaining facts which he has not directly
observed: not from any general purpose of adding to his stock of knowledge,
but because the facts themselves are of importance to his interests or to
his occupations. The business of the magistrate, of the military commander,
of the navigator, of the physician, of the agriculturist, is merely to
judge of evidence and to act accordingly. . . . As they do this well or
ill, so they discharge well or ill the duties of their several callings. It
is the only occupation in which the mind never ceases to be engaged." [1]
               ? 2. Importance of Direction in Order to Realize these Values
  Thinking goes astray
  What a person has not only daily and hourly, but momentary need of
performing, is not a technical and abstruse matter; nor, on the other hand,
is it trivial and negligible. Such a function must be congenial to the
mind, and must be performed, in an unspoiled mind, upon every fitting
occasion. just because, however, it is an operation of drawing inferences,
of basing conclusions upon evidence, of reaching belief indirectly, it is
[pic]
(19) an operation that may go wrong as well as right, and hence is one that
needs safeguarding and training. The greater its importance the greater are
the evils when it is ill-exercised.
  Ideas are our rulers ― for better or worse
  An earlier writer than Mill, John Locke (1632-1704), brings out the
importance of thought for life and the need of training so that its best
and not its worst possibilities will be realized, in the following words:
"No man ever sets himself about anything but upon some view or other, which
serves him for a reason for what he does; and whatsoever faculties he
employs, the understanding with such light as it has, well or ill informed,
constantly leads; and by that light, true or false, all his operative
powers are directed. . . . Temples have their sacred images, and we see
what influence they have always had over a great part of mankind. But in
truth the ideas and images in men's minds are the invisible powers that
constantly govern them, and to these they all, universally, pay a ready
submission. It is therefore of the highest concernment that great care
should be taken of the understanding, to conduct it aright in the search of
knowledge and in the judgments it makes." [2] If upon thought hang all
deliberate activities and the uses we make of all our other powers, Locke's
assertion that it is of the highest concernment that care should be taken
of its conduct is a moderate statement. While the power of thought frees us
from servile subjection to instinct, appetite, and routine, it also brings
with it the occasion and possibility of error and mistake. In elevating us
above the brute, it opens to us the possibility of failures to which the
animal, limited to instinct, cannot sink.
[pic]
(20)
                                 ? 3. Tendencies Needing Constant Regulation
  Physical and social sanctions of correct thinking
  Up to a certain point, the ordinary conditions of life, natural and
social, provide the conditions requisite for regulating the operations of
inference. The necessities of life enforce a fundamental and persistent
discipline for which the most cunningly devised artifices would be
ineffective substitutes. The burnt child dreads the fire; the painful
consequence emphasizes the need of correct inference much more than would
learned discourse on the properties of heat. Social conditions also put a
premium on correct inferring in matters where action based on valid thought
is socially important. These sanctions of proper thinking may affect life
itself, or at least a life reasonably free from perpetual discomfort. The
signs of enemies, of shelter, of food, of the main social conditions, have
to be correctly apprehended.
  The serious limitations of such sanctions
  But this disciplinary training, efficacious as it is within certain
limits, does not carry us beyond a restricted boundary. Logical attainment
in one direction is no bar to extravagant conclusions in another. A savage
expert in judging signs of the movements and location of animals that he
hunts, will accept and gravely narrate the most preposterous yarns
concerning the origin of their habits and structures. When there is no
directly appreciable reaction of the inference upon the security and
prosperity of life, there are no natural checks to the acceptance of wrong
beliefs. Conclusions may be generated by a modicum of fact merely because
the suggestions are vivid and interesting; a large accumulation of data may
fail to suggest a proper conclusion because existing customs are averse to
entertaining it. Independent of training, there is a "primitive credulity "
[pic]
(21) which tends to make no distinction between what a trained mind calls
fancy and that which it calls a reasonable conclusion. The face in the
clouds is believed in as some sort of fact, merely because it is forcibly
suggested. Natural intelligence is- no barrier to the propagation of error,
nor large but untrained experience to the accumulation of fixed false
beliefs. Errors may support one another mutually and weave an ever larger
and firmer fabric of misconception. Dreams, the positions of stars, the
lines of the hand, may be regarded as valuable signs, and the fall of cards
as an inevitable omen, while natural events of the most crucial
significance go disregarded. Beliefs in portents of various kinds, now mere
nook and cranny superstitions, were once universal. A long discipline in
exact science was required for their conquest.
  Superstition as natural as a result as science
  In the mere function of suggestion, there is no difference between the
power of a column of mercury to portend rain, and that of the entrails of
an animal or the flight of birds to foretell the fortunes of war. For all
anybody can tell in advance, the spilling of salt is as likely to import
bad luck as the bite of a mosquito to import malaria. Only systematic
regulation of the conditions under which observations are made and severe
discipline of the habits of entertaining suggestions can secure a decision
that one type of belief is vicious and the other sound. The substitution of
scientific for superstitious habits of inference has not been brought about
by any improvement in the acuteness of the senses or in the natural
workings of the function of suggestion. It is the result of regulation of
the conditions under which observation and inference take place.
[pic]
  General causes of bad thinking: Bacon's "idols"
(22) It is instructive to note some of the attempts that have been made to
classify the main sources of error in reaching beliefs. Francis Bacon, for
example, at the beginnings of modern scientific inquiry, enumerated four
such classes, under the somewhat fantastic title of "idols" (Gr. , images),
spectral forms that allure the mind into false paths. These he called the
idols, or phantoms, of the (a) tribe, (b) the market-place, (c) the cave or
den, and (d) the theater; or, less metaphorically, (a) standing erroneous
methods (or at least temptations to error) that have their roots in human
nature generally; (b) those that come from intercourse and language; (c)
those that are due to causes peculiar to a specific individual; and
finally, (d) those that have their sources in the fashion or general
current of a period. Classifying these causes of fallacious belief somewhat
differently, we may say that two are intrinsic and two are extrinsic. Of
the intrinsic, one is common to all men alike (such as the universal
tendency to notice instances that corroborate a favorite belief more
readily than those that contradict it), while the other resides in the
specific temperament and habits of the given individual. Of the extrinsic,
―one proceeds from generic social conditions ― like the tendency to suppose
that there is a fact wherever there is a word, and no fact where there is
no linguistic term ― while the other proceeds from local and temporary
social currents.
  Locke on the influence of
  Locke's method of dealing with typical forms of wrong belief is less
formal and may be more enlightening. We can hardly do better than quote his
forcible and quaint language, when, enumerating different classes of men,
he shows different ways in which thought goes wrong:
[pic]
(23)
  (a) dependence on others
  1. " The first is of those who seldom reason at all, but do and think
according to the example of others, whether parents, neighbors, ministers,
or who else they are pleased to make choice of to have an implicit faith
in, for the saving of themselves the pains and troubles of thinking and
examining for themselves."
  (b) self-interest,
  2. "This kind is of those who put passion in the place of reason, and
being resolved that shall govern their actions and arguments, neither use
their own, nor hearken to other people's reason, any farther than it suits
their humor, interest, or party." [3]
  of strong passions,
  3. "Predominant Passions. Thirdly, probabilities which cross men's
appetites and prevailing passions run the same fate. Let ever so much
probability hang on one side of a covetous man's reasoning, and money on
the other, it is easy to foresee which will outweigh. Earthly minds, like
mud walls, resist the strongest batteries.
  of dependence upon authority of others,
  4. "Authority. The fourth and last wrong measure of probability I shall
take notice of, and which keeps in ignorance or error more people than all
the others together, is the giving up our assent to the common received
opinions, either of our friends or party, neighborhood or country."
  Causes of bad mental habits are social as well as inborn
  Both Bacon and Locke make it evident that over and above the sources of
misbelief that reside in the natural tendencies of the individual (like
those toward hasty and too far-reaching conclusions), social conditions
tend to instigate and confirm wrong habits of thinking by authority, by
conscious instruction, and by the even more insidious half-conscious
influences of language, imitation, sympathy, and suggestion. Education has
accordingly not only to safeguard an individual against the besetting
erroneous tendencies of his own mind its rashness, presumption, and
preference of what chimer, with self-interest to objective evidence- but
also to undermine and destroy the accumulated and self-perpetuating
prejudices of long ages. When social life in general has become more
reasonable, more imbued with rational conviction, and less moved by stiff
authority and blind passion, educational agencies may be more positive and
constructive than at present, for they will
[pic]
(26) work in harmony with the educative influence exercised willy-nilly by
other social surroundings upon an individual's habits of thought and
belief. At present, the work of teaching must not only transform natural
tendencies into trained habits of thought, but must also fortify the mind
against irrational tendencies current in the social environment, and help
displace erroneous habits already produced.
                             ? 4. Regulation Transforms Inference into Proof
  A leap is involved in all thinking
  Thinking is important because, as we have seen, it is that function in
which given or ascertained facts stand for or indicate others which are not
directly ascertained. But the process of reaching the absent from the
present is peculiarly exposed to error; it is liable to be influenced by
almost any number of unseen and unconsidered causes, ― past experience,
received dogmas, the stirring of self-interest, the arousing of passion ,
sheer mental laziness, a social environment steeped in biased traditions or
animated by false expectations, and so on. The exercise of thought is, in
the literal sense of that word, inference; by it one thing carries us over
to the idea of, and belief in, another thing. It involves a jump, a leap, a
going beyond what is surely known to something else accepted on its
warrant. Unless one is an idiot, one simply cannot help having all things
and events suggest other things not actually present, nor can one help a
tendency to believe in the latter on the, basis of the former. The very
inevitableness of the jump, the leap, to something unknown, only emphasizes
the necessity of attention to the conditions under which it occurs so that
the danger of a false step may be lessened and the probability of a right
landing increased.
[pic]
(27)
  Hence, the need of regulation which, when adequate, makes proof
  Such attention consists in regulation (I) of the conditions under which
the function of suggestion takes place, and (2) of the conditions under
which credence is yielded to the suggestions that occur. Inference
controlled in these two ways (the study of which in detail constitutes one
of the chief objects of this book) forms proof. To prove a thing means
primarily to try, to test it. The guest bidden to the wedding feast excused
himself because he had to prove his oxen. Exceptions are said to prove a
rule; i.e. they furnish instances so extreme that they try in the severest
fashion its applicability ; if the rule will stand such a test, there is no
good reason for further doubting it. Not until a thing has been tried ― "
tried out," in colloquial language ― do we know its true worth. Till then
it may be pretense, a bluff. But the thing that has come out victorious in
a test or trial of strength carries its credentials with it; it is
approved, because it has been proved. Its value is clearly evinced, shown,
ie. demonstrated. So it is with inferences. The mere fact that inference in
general is an invaluable function does not guarantee, nor does it even help
out the correctness of any particular inference. Any inference may go
astray; and as we have seen, there are standing influences ever ready to
assist its going wrong. What is important, is that every inference shall be
a tested inference; or (since often this is not possible) that we shall
discriminate between beliefs that rest upon tested evidence and those that
do not, and shall be accordingly on our guard as to the kind and degree of
assent yielded.
  The office of education in forming skilled powers of thinking
  While it is not the business of education to prove every statement made,
any more than to teach every possible item of information, it is its
business to culti-
[pic]
(28) vate deep-seated and effective habits of discriminating tested beliefs
from mere assertions, guesses, and opinions; to develop a lively, sincere,
and open-minded preference for conclusions that are properly grounded, and
to ingrain into the individual's working habits methods of inquiry and
reasoning appropriate to the various problems that present themselves. No
matter bow much an individual knows as a matter of hearsay and information,
if he has not attitudes and habits of this sort, be is not intellectually
educated. He lacks the rudiments of mental discipline. And since these
habits are not a gift of nature (no matter how strong the aptitude for
acquiring them); since, moreover, the casual circumstances of the natural
and social environment are not enough to compel their acquisition, the main
office of education is to supply conditions that make for their
cultivation. The formation of these habits is the Training of Mind.
                                                                       Notes
     1. Mill, System of Logic, Introduction, ? 5.
     2. Locke, Of the Conduct of the Understanding, first paragraph.
     3. In another place he says: "Men's prejudices and inclinations impose
        often upon themselves. . . . Inclination suggests and slides into
        discourse favorable terms, which introduce favorable ideas; till at
        last by this means that is concluded clear and evident, thus dressed
        up, which, taken in its native state, by making use of none but
        precise determined ideas, would find no admittance at all."
     4. The Conduct of the Understanding, ? 3
     5. Essay Concerning Human Understanding, bk. IV, ch. XX, "Of Wrong
        Assent or Error."
                     Chapter 3: Natural Resources in the Training of Thought
Only native powers can be trained.
  In the last chapter we considered the need of transforming, through
training, the natural capacities of inference into habits of critical
examination and inquiry. The very importance of thought for life makes
necessary its control by education because of its natural tendency to go
astray, and because social influences exist that tend to form habits of
thought leading to inadequate and erroneous beliefs. Training must,
however, be itself based upon the natural tendencies, ― that is, it must
find its point of departure in them. A being who could not think without
training could never be trained to think; one may have to learn to think
well, but not to think.
  Training, in short, must fall back upon the prior and independent
existence of natural powers; it is concerned with their proper direction,
not with creating them.
  Hence, the one taught must take the initiative
  Teaching and learning are correlative or corresponding processes, as much
so as selling and buying. One might as well say he has sold when no one has
bought, as to say that he has taught when no one has learned.  And in the
educational transaction, the initiative lies with the learner even more
than in commerce it lies with the buyer. If an individual can learn to
think only in the sense of learning to employ more economically and
[pic]
(30) effectively powers he already possesses, even more truly one can teach
others to think only in the sense of appealing to and fostering powers
already active in them. Effective appeal of this kind is impossible unless
the teacher has an insight into existing habits and tendencies, the natural
resources with which he has to ally himself.
  Three important natural resources
  Any inventory of the items of this natural capital is somewhat arbitrary
because it must pass over many of the complex details. But a statement of
the factors essential to thought will put before us in outline the main
elements. Thinking involves (as we have seen) the suggestion of a
conclusion for acceptance, and also search or inquiry to test the value of
the suggestion before finally accepting it. This implies (a) a certain fund
or store of experiences and facts from which suggestions proceed; (b)
promptness, flexibility, and fertility of suggestions; and (c) orderliness,
consecutiveness, appropriateness in what is suggested. Clearly, a person
may be hampered in any of these three regards: His thinking may be
irrelevant, narrow, or crude because he has not enough actual material upon
which to base conclusions; or because concrete facts and raw material, even
if extensive and bulky, fail to evoke suggestions easily and richly; or
finally, because, even when these two conditions are fulfilled, the ideas
suggested are incoherent and fantastic, rather than pertinent and
consistent.
                                                              ? 1. Curiosity
  Desire for fullness of experience
  The most vital and significant factor in supplying the primary material
whence suggestion may issue is, without doubt, curiosity. The wisest of the
Greeks used to
[pic]
(31) say that wonder is the mother of all science. An inert mind waits, as
it were, for experiences to be imperiously forced upon it. The pregnant
saying of Wordsworth :
       The eye ―- it cannot choose but see;
       We cannot bid the ear be still;
       Our bodies feel, where'er they be,
       Against or with our will "
holds good in the degree in which one is naturally possessed by curiosity.
The curious mind is constantly alert and exploring, seeking material for
thought, as a vigorous and healthy body is on the qui vive for nutriment.
Eagerness for experience, for new and varied contacts, is found where
wonder is found. Such curiosity is the only sure guarantee of the
acquisition of the primary facts upon which inference must base itself.
  (a) physical
  (a) In its first manifestations, curiosity is a vital overflow, an
expression of an abundant organic energy. A physiological uneasiness leads
a child to be " into everything,"― to be reaching, poking, pounding,
prying. Observers of animals have noted what one author calls "their
inveterate tendency to fool." " Rats run about, smell, dig, or gnaw,
without real reference to the business in hand. In the same way Jack Ea
dog] scrabbles and jumps, the kitten wanders and picks, the otter slips
about everywhere like ground lightning, the elephant fumbles ceaselessly,
the monkey pulls things about."[1] The most casual notice of the activities
of a young child reveals a ceaseless display of exploring and testing
activity. Objects are sucked, fingered, and thumped; drawn and pushed,
handled and thrown; in short, experi-
[pic]
(32) -mented with, till they cease to yield new qualities. Such activities
are hardly intellectual, and yet without them intellectual activity would
be feeble and intermittent through lack of stuff for its operations.
  (b) social
  (b) A higher stage of curiosity develops under the influence of social
stimuli. When the child learns that he can appeal to others to eke out his
store of experiences, so that, if objects fail to respond interestingly to
his experiments, he may call upon persons to provide interesting material,
a new epoch sets in. "What is that? " "Why? " become the unfailing signs of
a child's presence. At first this questioning is hardly more than a
projection into social relations of the physical overflow which earlier
kept the child pushing and pulling, opening and shutting. He asks in
succession what holds up the house, what holds up the soil that holds the
house, what holds up the earth that holds the soil; but his questions are
not evidence of any genuine consciousness of rational connections. His why
is not a demand for scientific explanation; the motive behind it is simply
eagerness for a larger acquaintance with the mysterious world in which he
is placed. The search is not for a law or principle, but only for a bigger
fact. Yet there is more than a desire to accumulate just information or
heap up disconnected items, although sometimes the interrogating habit
threatens to degenerate into a mere disease of language. In the feeling,
however dim, that the facts which directly meet the senses are not the
whole story, that there is more behind them and more to come from them,
lies the germ of intellectual curiosity.
  (c) intellectual
  (c) Curiosity rises above the organic and the social planes and becomes
intellectual in the degree in which
[pic]
(33) it is transformed into interest in problems provoked by the
observation of things and the accumulation of material. When the question
is not discharged by being asked of another, when the child continues to
entertain it in his own mind and to be alert for whatever will help answer
it, curiosity has become a positive intellectual force. To the open mind,
nature and social experience are full of varied and subtle challenges to
look further. If germinating powers are not used and cultivated at the
right moment, they tend to be transitory, to die out, or to wane in
intensity. This general law is peculiarly true of sensitiveness to what is
uncertain and questionable; in a few people, intellectual curiosity is so
insatiable that nothing will discourage it, but in most its edge is easily
dulled and blunted. Bacon's saying that we must become as little children
in order to enter the kingdom of science is at once a reminder of the open-
minded and flexible wonder of childhood and of the ease with which this
endowment is lost. Some lose it in indifference or carelessness; others in
a frivolous flippancy; many escape these evils only to become incased in a
hard dogmatism which is equally fatal to the spirit of wonder. Some are so
taken up with routine as to be inaccessible to new facts and problems.
Others retain curiosity only with reference to what concerns their personal
advantage in their chosen career. With many, curiosity is arrested on the
plane of interest in local gossip and in the fortunes of their neighbors;
indeed, so usual is this result that very often the first association with
the word curiosity is a prying inquisitiveness into other people's
business. With respect then to curiosity, the teacher has usually more to
learn than to teach. Rarely can he aspire to the office of kindling or
[pic]
(34) even increasing it. His task is rather to keep alive the sacred spark
of wonder and to fan the flame that already glows. His problem is to
protect the spirit of inquiry, to keep it from becoming blas頦rom
overexcitement, wooden from routine, fossilized through dogmatic
instruction, or dissipated by random exercise upon trivial things.
                                                             ? 2. Suggestion
  Out of the subject-matter, whether rich or scanty, important or trivial,
of present experience issue suggestions, ideas, beliefs as to what is not
yet given. The function of suggestion is not one that can be produced by
teaching; while it may be modified for better or worse by conditions, it
cannot be destroyed. Many a child has tried his best to see if he could not
"stop thinking," but the flow of suggestions goes on in spite of our will,
quite as surely as " our bodies feel, where'er they be, against or with our
will." Primarily, naturally, it is not we who think, in any actively
responsible sense; thinking is rather something that happens in us. Only so
far as one has acquired control of the method in which the function of
suggestion occurs and has accepted responsibility for its consequences, can
one truthfully say, "I think so and so."
  The dimensions of suggestion:
(a) ease
  The function of suggestion has a variety of aspects (or dimensions as we
may term them), varying in different persons, both in themselves and in
their mode of combination. These dimensions are case or promptness, extent
or variety, and depth or persistence. (a) The common classification of
persons into the dull and the bright is made primarily on the basis of the
readiness or facility with which suggestions follow upon the presenta-
[pic]
(35) -tion of objects and upon the happening of events. As the metaphor of
dull and bright implies, some minds are impervious, or else they absorb
passively. Everything presented is lost in a drab monotony that gives
nothing back. But others reflect, or give back in varied lights, all that
strikes upon them. The dull make no response; the bright flash back the
fact with a changed quality. An inert or stupid mind requires a heavy jolt
or an intense shock to move it to suggestion ; the bright mind is quick, is
alert to react with interpretation and suggestion of consequences to
follow.
  Yet the teacher is not entitled to assume stupidity or even dullness
merely because of irresponsiveness to school subjects or to a lesson as
presented by text-book or teacher. The pupil labeled hopeless may react in
quick and lively fashion when the thing-in-hand seems to him worth while,
as some out-of-school sport or social affair. Indeed, the school subject
might move him, were it set in a different context and treated by a
different method. A boy dull in geometry may prove quick enough when he
takes up the subject in connection with manual training; the girl who seems
inaccessible to historical facts may respond promptly when it is a question
of judging the character and deeds of people of her acquaintance or of
fiction. Barring physical defect or disease, slowness and dullness in all
directions are comparatively rare.
  (b) range
  (b) Irrespective of the difference in persons as to the ease and
promptness with which ideas respond to facts, there is a difference in the
number or range of the suggestions that occur. We speak truly, in some
cases, of the flood, of suggestions; in others, there is but a slender
trickle. Occasionally, slowness of outward
[pic]
(36) response is due to a great variety of suggestions which check one
another and lead to hesitation and suspense; while a lively and prompt
suggestion may take such possession of the mind as to preclude the
development of others. Too few suggestions indicate a dry and meager mental
habit; when this is joined to great learning, there results a pedant or a
Gradgrind. Such a person's mind rings hard; he is likely to bore others
with mere bulk of information. He contrasts with the person whom we call
ripe, juicy, and mellow.
  A conclusion reached after consideration of a few alternatives may be
formally correct, but it will not possess the fullness and richness of
meaning of one arrived at after comparison of a greater variety of
alternative suggestions. On the other hand, suggestions may be too numerous
and too varied for the best interests of mental habit. So many suggestions
may rise that the person is at a loss to select among them. He finds it
difficult to reach any definite conclusion and wanders more or less
helplessly among them. So much suggests itself pro and con, one thing leads
on to another so naturally, that he finds it difficult to decide in
practical affairs or to conclude in matters of theory. There is such a
thing as too much thinking, as when action is paralyzed by the multiplicity
of views suggested by a situation. Or again, the very number of suggestions
may be hostile to tracing logical sequences among them, for it may tempt
the mind away from the necessary but trying task of search for real
connections, into the more congenial occupation of embroidering upon the
given facts a tissue of agreeable fancies. The best mental habit involves a
balance between paucity and redundancy of suggestions.
[pic]
(37)
  (c) profundity
  (c) Depth. We distinguish between people not only upon the basis of their
quickness and fertility of intellectual response, but also with respect to
the plane upon which it occurs ― the intrinsic quality of the response.
  One man's thought is profound while another's is superficial ; one goes to
the roots of the matter, and another touches lightly its most external
aspects. This phase of thinking is perhaps the most untaught of all, and
the least amenable to external influence whether for improvement or harm.
Nevertheless, the conditions of the pupil's contact with subject-matter may
be such that he is compelled to come to quarters with its more significant
features, or such that he is encouraged to deal with it upon the basis of
what is trivial. The common assumptions that, if the pupil only thinks, one
thought is just as good for his mental discipline as another, and that the
end of study is the amassing of information, both tend to foster
superficial, at the expense of significant, thought. Pupils who in matters
of ordinary practical experience have a ready and acute perception of the
difference between the significant and the meaningless, often reach in
school subjects a point where all things seem equally important or equally
unimportant; where one thing is just as likely to be true as another, and
where intellectual effort is expended not in discriminating between things,
but in trying to make verbal connections among words.
  Balance of mind
  Sometimes slowness and depth of response are intimately connected. Time
'is required in order to digest impressions, and translate them into
substantial ideas " Brightness " may be but a flash in the pan. The " slow
but sure " person, whether man or child, is one in whom impressions sink
and accumulate, so that thinking is done
[pic]
(38) at a deeper level of value than with a slighter load. Many a child is
rebuked for "slowness," for not "answering promptly," when his forces are
taking time to gather themselves together to deal effectively with the
problem at hand. In such cases, failure to afford time and leisure conduce
to habits of speedy, but snapshot and superficial, judgment. The depth to
which a sense of the problem, of the difficulty, sinks, determines the
quality of the thinking that follows; and any habit of teaching which
encourages the pupil for the sake of a successful recitation or of a
display of memorized information to glide over the thin ice of genuine
problems reverses the true method of mind training.
  Individual differences
  It is profitable to study the lives of men and women who achieve in adult
life fine things in their respective callings, but who were called dull in
their school days. Sometimes the early wrong judgment was due mainly to the
fact that the direction in which the child showed his ability was not one
recognized by the good old standards in use, as in the case of Darwin's
interest in beetles, snakes, and frogs. Sometimes it was due to the fact
that the child dwelling habitually on a deeper plane of reflection than
other pupils ― or than his teachers ― did not show to advantage when prompt
answers of the usual sort were expected. Sometimes it was due to the fact
that the pupil's natural mode of approach clashed habitually with that of
the text or teacher, and the method of the latter was assumed as an
absolute basis of estimate.
  Any subject may be intellectual
  In any event, it is desirable that the teacher should rid himself of the
notion that "thinking" is a single, unalterable faculty; that he should
recognize that it is a term denoting the various ways in which things
acquire
[pic]
(39) significance. It is desirable to expel also the kindred notion that
some subjects are inherently " intellectual," and hence possessed of an
almost magical power to train the faculty of thought. Thinking is specific,
not a machinelike, ready-made apparatus to be turned indifferently and at
will upon all subjects, as a lantern may throw its light as it happens upon
horses, streets, gardens, trees, or river. Thinking is specific, in that
different things suggest their own appropriate meanings, tell their own
unique stories, and in that they do this in very different ways with
different persons. As the growth of the body is through the assimilation of
food, so the growth of mind is through the logical organization of subject-
matter. Thinking is not like a sausage machine which reduces all materials
indifferently to one marketable commodity, but is a power of following up
and linking together the specific suggestions that specific things arouse.
Accordingly, any subject, from Greek to cooking, and from drawing to
mathematics, is intellectual, if intellectual at all, not in its fixed
inner structure, but in its function ― in its power to start and direct
significant inquiry and reflection. What geometry does for one, the
manipulation of laboratory apparatus, the mastery of a musical composition,
or the conduct of a business affair, may do for another.
                                                ? 3. Orderliness: Its Nature
  Facts, whether narrow or extensive, and conclusions suggested by them,
whether many or few, do not constitute, even when combined, reflective
thought. The suggestions must be organized; they must be arranged with
reference to one another and with reference to the facts on which they
depend for proof. When the
[pic]
  Continuity
(40) factors of facility, of fertility, and of depth are properly balanced
or proportioned, we get as the outcome continuity of thought. We desire
neither the slow mind nor yet the hasty. We wish neither random diffuseness
nor fixed rigidity. Consecutiveness means flexibility and variety of
materials, conjoined with singleness and definiteness of direction. It is
opposed both to a mechanical routine uniformity and to a grasshopper-like
movement. Of bright children, it is not infrequently said that " they might
do anything, if only they settled down," so quick and apt are they in any
particular response. But, alas, they rarely settle.
  On the other hand, it is not enough not to be diverted. A deadly and
fanatic consistency is not our goal. Concentration does not mean fixity,
nor a cramped arrest or paralysis of the flow of suggestion. It means
variety and change of ideas combined into a single steady trend moving
toward a unified conclusion. Thoughts are concentrated not by being kept
still and quiescent, but by being kept moving toward an object, as a
general concentrates his troops for attack or defense. Holding the mind to
a subject is like holding a ship to its course; it implies constant change
of place combined with unity of direction. Consistent and orderly thinking
is precisely such a change of subject-matter. Consistency is no more the
mere absence of contradiction than concentration is the mere absence of
diversion which exists in dull routine or in a person "fast asleep." All
kinds of varied and incompatible suggestions may sprout and be followed in
their growth, and yet thinking be consistent and orderly, provided each one
of the suggestions is viewed in relation to the main topic.
  In the main, for most persons, the primary resource
[pic]
  Practical demands enforce some degree of continuity
(41) in the development of orderly habits of thought is indirect, not
direct. Intellectual organization originates and for a time grows as an
accompaniment of the organization of the acts required to realize an end,
not as the result of a direct appeal to thinking power. The need of
thinking to accomplish something beyond thinking is more potent than
thinking for its own sake. All people at the outset, and the majority of
people probably all their lives, attain ordering of thought through
ordering of action. Adults normally carry on some occupation, profession,
pursuit; and this furnishes the continuous axis about which their
knowledge, their beliefs, and their habits of reaching and testing
conclusions are organized. Observations that have to do with the efficient
performance of their calling are extended and rendered precise. Information
related to it is not merely amassed and then left in a heap; it is
classified and subdivided so as to be available as it is needed. Inferences
are made by most men not from purely speculative motives, but because they
are involved in the efficient performance of "the duties involved in their
several callings." Thus their inferences are constantly tested by results
achieved; futile and scattering methods tend to be discounted; orderly
arrangements have a premium put upon them. The event, the issue, stands as
a constant check on the thinking that has led up to it; and this discipline
by efficiency in action is the chief sanction, in practically all who are
not scientific specialists, of orderliness of thought.
  Such a resource ― the main prop of disciplined thinking in adult life ― is
not to be despised in training the young in right intellectual habits.
There are, however, profound differences between the immature and the
[pic]
(42) adult in the matter of organized activity ― differences which must be
taken seriously into account in any educational use of activities: (i) The
external achievement resulting from activity is a more urgent necessity
with the adult, and hence is with him a more effective means of discipline
of mind than with the child; (ii) The ends of adult activity are more
specialized than those of child activity.
  Peculiar difficulty with children
  (i) The selection and arrangement of appropriate lines of action is a much
more difficult problem as respects youth than it is in the case of adults.
With the latter, the main lines are more or less settled by circumstances.
The social status of the adult, the fact that he is a citizen, a
householder, a parent, one occupied in some regular industrial or
professional calling, prescribes the chief features of the acts to be
performed, and secures, somewhat automatically, as it were, appropriate and
related modes of thinking. But with the child there is no such fixity of
status and pursuit; there is almost nothing to dictate that such and such a
consecutive line of action, rather than another, should be followed, while
the will of others, his own caprice, and circumstances about him tend to
produce an isolated momentary act. The absence of continued motivation
cooperates with the inner plasticity of the immature to increase the
importance of educational training and the difficulties in the way of
finding consecutive modes of activities which may do for child and youth
what serious vocations and functions do for the adult. In the case of
children; the choice is so peculiarly exposed to arbitrary factors, to mere
school traditions, to waves of pedagogical fad and fancy, to fluctuating
social cross currents, that sometimes, in sheer disgust at the inadequacy
of results, a reaction occurs
[pic]
(43) to the total neglect of overt activity as an educational factor, and a
recourse to purely theoretical subjects and methods.
  Peculiar opportunity with children
  (ii) This very difficulty, however, points to the fact that the
opportunity for selecting truly educative activities is indefinitely
greater in child life than in adult. The factor of external pressure is so
strong with most adults that the educative value of the pursuit its reflex
influence upon intelligence and character however genuine, is incidental,
and frequently almost accidental. The problem and the opportunity with the
young is selection of orderly and continuous modes of occupation, which,
while they lead up to and prepare for the indispensable activities of adult
life, have their own sufficient justification in their present reflex
influence upon the formation of habits of thought.
  Action and reaction between extremes
  Educational practice shows a continual tendency to oscillate between two
extremes with respect to overt  and exertive activities. One extreme is to
neglect them almost entirely, on the ground that they are chaotic and
fluctuating, mere diversions appealing to the transitory unformed taste and
caprice of immature minds; or if they avoid this evil, are objectionable
copies of the highly specialized, and more or less commercial, activities
of adult life. If activities are admitted at all into the school, the
admission is a grudging concession to the necessity of having occasional
relief from the strain of constant intellectual work, or to the clamor of
outside utilitarian demands upon the school. The other extreme is an
enthusiastic belief in the almost magical educative efficacy of any kind of
activity, granted it is an activity and not a passive absorption of
academic and theoretic material. The conceptions of play, of
[pic]
(44) self-expression, of natural growth, are appealed to almost as if they
meant that opportunity for any kind of spontaneous activity inevitably
secures the due training of mental power; or a mythological brain
physiology is appealed to as proof that any exercise of the muscles trains
power of thought.
  Locating the problem of education
  While we vibrate from one of these extremes to the other, the most serious
of all problems is ignored: the problem, namely, of discovering and
arranging the forms of activity (a) which are most congenial,. best
adapted, to the immature stage of development; (b) which have the most
ulterior promise as preparation for the social responsibilities of adult
life; and (c) which, at the same time, have the maximum of influence in
forming habits of acute observation and of consecutive inference. As
curiosity is related to the acquisition of material of thought, as
suggestion is related to flexibility and force of thought, so the ordering
of activities, not themselves primarily intellectual, is related to the
forming of intellectual powers of consecutiveness.
                                                                       Notes
     1. Hobhouse, Mind in Evolution, p. 195.
                    Chapter 4: School Conditions and the Training of Thought
Formal discipline
  THE so-called faculty-psychology went hand in hand with the vogue of the
formal-discipline idea in education. If thought is a distinct piece of
mental machinery. separate from observation, memory, imagination, and
common-sense judgments of persons and things, then thought should be
trained by special exercises designed for the purpose, as one might devise
special exercises for developing the biceps muscles. Certain subjects are
then to be regarded as intellectual or logical subjects par excellence,
possessed of a predestined fitness to exercise the thought-faculty, just as
certain machines are better than others for developing arm power. With
these three notions goes the fourth, that method consists of a set of
operations by which the machinery of thought is set going and kept at work
upon any subject-matter.
  versus real thinking
  We have tried to make it clear in the previous chapters that there is no
single and uniform power of thought, but a multitude of different ways in
which specific things ― things observed, remembered, heard of, read about ―
evoke suggestions or ideas that are pertinent to the occasion and fruitful
in the sequel. Training is such development of curiosity, suggestion, and
habits of exploring and testing, as increases their scope
[pic]
(46) and efficiency. A subject ― any subject ― is intellectual in the
degree in which with any given person it succeeds in effecting this growth.
On this view the fourth factor, method, is concerned with providing
conditions so adapted to individual needs and powers as to make for the
permanent improvement of observation, suggestion, and investigation.
  True and false meaning of method
  The teacher's problem is thus twofold. On the one side, he needs (as we
saw in the last chapter) to be a student of individual traits and habits ;
on the other side, he needs to be a student of the conditions that modify
for better or worse the directions in which individual powers habitually
express themselves. He needs to recognize that method covers not only what
he intentionally devises and employs for the purpose of mental training,
but also what he does without any conscious reference to it, ― anything in
the atmosphere and conduct of the school which reacts in any way upon the
curiosity, the responsiveness, and the orderly activity of children. The
teacher who is an intelligent student both of individual mental operations
and of the effects of school conditions upon those operations, can largely
be trusted to develop for himself methods of instruction in their narrower
and more technical sense ―those best adapted to achieve results in
particular subjects, such as reading, geography, or algebra. In the hands
of one who is not intelligently aware of individual capacities and of the
influence unconsciously exerted upon them by the entire environment, even
the best of technical methods are likely to get an immediate result only at
the expense of deep-seated and persistent habits. We may group the
conditioning influences of the school environment under three heads: (i)
the mental attitudes and habits of the
[pic]
(47) persons with whom the child is in contact; (2) the subjects studied;
(3) current educational aims and ideals.
  Influence of the Habits of Others
  Bare reference to the imitativeness of human nature is enough to suggest
how profoundly the mental habits of others affect the attitude of the one
being trained. Example is more potent than precept; and a teacher's best
conscious efforts may be more than counteracted by the influence of
personal traits which he is unaware of or regards as unimportant. Methods
of instruction and discipline that are technically faulty may be rendered
practically innocuous by the inspiration of the personal method that lies
back of them.
  Response to environment fundamental in method
  To confine, however, the conditioning influence of the educator, whether
parent or teacher, to imitation is to get a very superficial view of the
intellectual influence of others. Imitation is but one case of a deeper
principle -that of stimulus and response. Everything the teacher does, as
well as the manner in which he does it, incites the child to respond in
some way or other, and each response tends to set the child's attitude in
some way or other. Even the inattention of the child to the adult is often
a mode of response which is the result of unconscious training.[1] The
teacher is rarely (and even then never entirely) a transparent medium of
access by another mind to a subject. With the young, the influence of the
teacher's personality is intimately fused with that of the subject; the
child does not separate
[pic]
(48) nor even distinguish the two. And as the child's response is toward or
away from anything presented, he keeps up a running commentary, of which be
himself is hardly distinctly aware, of like and dislike, of sympathy and
aversion, not merely to the acts of the teacher, but also to the subject
with which the teacher is occupied.
  Influence of teacher's own habits
  Judging others by ourselves
  The extent and power of this influence upon morals and manners, upon
character, upon habits of speech and social bearing, are almost universally
recognized. But the tendency to conceive of thought as an isolated faculty
has often blinded teachers to the f act that this influence is just as real
and pervasive in intellectual concerns. Teachers, as well as children,
stick more or less to the main points, have more or less wooden and rigid
methods of response, and display more or less intellectual curiosity about
matters that come up. And every trait of this kind is an inevitable part of
the teacher's method of teaching. Merely to accept without notice slipshod
habits of speech, slovenly inferences, unimaginative and literal response,
is to indorse these tendencies, and to ratify them into habits -and so it
goes throughout the whole range of contact between teacher and student. In
this complex and intricate field, two or three points may well be singled
out for special notice. (a) Most persons are quite unaware of the
distinguishing peculiarities of their own mental habit. They take their own
mental operations for granted, and unconsciously make them the standard for
judging the mental processes of others.[2] Hence there
[pic]
(49) is a tendency to encourage everything in the pupil which agrees with
this attitude, and to neglect or fail to understand whatever is incongruous
with it. The prevalent overestimation of the value, for mind-training, of
theoretic subjects as compared with practical pursuits, is doubtless due
partly to the fact that the teacher's calling tends to select those in whom
the theoretic interest is specially strong and to repel those in whom
executive abilities are marked. Teachers sifted out on this basis judge
pupils and subjects by a like standard, encouraging an intellectual one-
sidedness in those to whom it is naturally congenial, and repelling from
study those in whom practical instincts are more urgent.
  Exaggeration of direct personal influence
  (b) Teachers- and this holds especially of the stronger and better
teachers ― tend to rely upon their personal strong points to hold a child
to his work, and thereby to substitute their personal influence for that of
subject-matter as a motive for study. The teacher finds by experience that
his own personality is often effective where the power of the subject to
command attention is almost nil; then he utilizes the former more and more,
until the pupil's relation to the teacher almost takes the place of his
relation to the subject. In this way the teacher's personality may become a
source of personal dependence and weakness, an influence that renders the
pupil indifferent to the value of the subject for its own sake.
  Independent thinking versus "getting the answer
  (c) The operation of the teacher's own mental habit tends, unless
carefully watched and guided, to make the child a student of the teacher's
peculiarities rather than of the subjects that he is supposed to study. His
chief concern is to accommodate himself to what the
[pic]
(50) teacher expects of him, rather than to devote himself energetically to
the problems of subject-matter. "Is this right?" comes to mean "Will this
answer or this process satisfy the teacher? " ― instead of meaning, "Does
it satisfy the inherent conditions of the problem ? " It would be folly to
deny the legitimacy or the value of the study of human nature that children
carry on in school; but it is obviously undesirable that their chief
intellectual problem should be that of producing an answer approved by the
teacher, and their standard of success be successful adaptation to the
requirements of another.
                                     ? 3. Influence of the Nature of Studies
  Types of Studies
  Studies are conventionally and conveniently grouped under these heads: (1)
Those especially involving the acquisition of skill in performance-the
school arts, such as reading, writing, figuring, and music. (2) Those
mainly concerned with acquiring knowledge ―"informational " studies, such
as geography and history. (3) Those in which skill in doing and bulk of
information are relatively less important, and appeal to abstract thinking,
to " reasoning," is most marked ― "disciplinary " studies, such as
arithmetic and formal grammar.[3] Each of these groups of subjects has its
own special pitfalls.
  The abstract as the isolated
  (a) In the case of the so-called disciplinary or preeminently logical
studies, there is danger of the isolation of intellectual activity from the
ordinary affairs
[pic]
(51) of life. Teacher and student alike tend to set up a chasm between
logical thought as something abstract and remote, and the specific and
concrete demands of everyday events. The abstract tends to become so aloof,
so far away from application, as to be cut loose from practical and moral
bearing. The gullibility of specialized scholars when out of their own
lines, their extravagant habits of inference and speech, their ineptness in
reaching conclusions in practical matters, their egotistical engrossment in
their own subjects, are extreme examples of the bad effects of severing
studies completely from their ordinary connections in life.
  Overdoing the mechanical and automatic
"
  (b) The danger in those studies where the main, emphasis is upon
acquisition of skill is just the reverse. The tendency is to take the
shortest cuts possible to gain the required end. This makes the subjects
mechanical, and thus restrictive of intellectual power. In the mastery of
reading, writing, drawing, laboratory technique, etc., the need of economy
of time and material, of neatness and accuracy, of promptness and
uniformity, is so great that these things tend to become ends in
themselves, irrespective of their influence upon general mental attitude.
Sheer imitation, dictation of steps to be taken, mechanical drill, may give
results most quickly and yet strengthen traits likely to be fatal to
reflective power. The pupil is enjoined to do this and that specific thing,
with no knowledge of any reason except that by so doing be gets his result
most speedily; his mistakes are pointed out and corrected for him ; he is
kept at pure repetition of certain acts till they become automatic. Later,
teachers wonder why the pupil reads with so little expression, and figures
with so little intelligent consideration of the terms
[pic]
  "Drill"
(52) of his problem. In some educational dogmas and practices, the very
idea of training mind seems to be hopelessly confused with that of a drill
which hardly touches mind at all ― or touches it for the worse ― since it
is wholly taken up with training skill in external execution. This method
reduces the "training" of human beings to the level of animal training.
Practical skill, modes of effective technique, can be intelligently, non-
mechanically used, only when intelligence has played a part in their
acquisition.
  Wisdom versus information
  (c) Much the same sort of thing is to be said regarding studies where
emphasis traditionally falls upon bulk and accuracy of information. The
distinction between information and wisdom is old, and yet requires
constantly to be redrawn. Information is knowledge which is merely acquired
and stored up; wisdom is knowledge operating in the direction of powers to
the better living of life. Information, merely as information, implies no
special training of intellectual capacity; wisdom is the finest fruit of
that training. In school, amassing information always tends to escape from
the ideal of wisdom or good judgment. The aim often seems to be -especially
in such a subject as geography -to make the pupil what has been called a "
cyclopedia of useless information." Covering the ground " is the primary
necessity; the nurture of mind a bad second. Thinking cannot, of course, go
on in a vacuum; suggestions and inferences can occur only upon a basis of
information as to matters of fact.
  But there is all the difference in the world whether the acquisition of
information is treated as an end in itself, or is made an integral portion
of the training of thought. The assumption that information which has
                                                                       Notes
     1. A child of four or five who had been repeatedly called to the house
        by his mother with no apparent response on his own part, was asked
        if he did not hear her. He replied quite judicially, "Oh, yes, but
        she doesn't call very mad yet."
     2. People who have number-forms― i.e.project number series into space
        and see them arranged in certain shapes ― when asked why they have
        not mentioned the fact before, often reply that it never occurred to
        them; they supposed that everybody had the same power.
     3. Of course, any one subject has all three aspects : e.g. in
        arithmetic, counting, writing, and reading numbers, rapid adding,
        etc., are cases of skill in doing the tables of weights and measures
        are a matter of information, etc.
  Chapter 5: The Means and End of Mental Training: The Psychological and the
                                                                     Logical
                                   ? I. Introductory: The Meaning of Logical
Special topic of this chapter
  IN the preceding chapters we have considered (i) what thinking is; (ii)
the importance of its special training; (iii) the natural tendencies that
lend themselves to its training; and (iv) some of the special obstacles in
the way of its training under school conditions. We come now to the
relation of logic to the purpose of mental training.
  Three sense of term logical
  The practical is the important meaning of logical
  In its broadest sense, any thinking that ends in a conclusion is logical
-whether the conclusion reached be justified or fallacious; that is, the
term logical covers both the logically good and the illogical or the
logically bad. In its narrowest sense, the term logical refers only to what
is demonstrated to follow necessarily from premises that are definite in
meaning and that are either self-evidently true, or that have been
previously proved to be true. Stringency of proof is here the equivalent of
the logical. In this sense mathematics and formal logic (perhaps as a
branch of mathematics) alone are strictly logical. Logical, however, is
used in a third sense, which is at once more vital and more practical; to
denote, namely, the systematic care, negative and positive, taken to
safeguard reflection so that it may yield the best results under the given
conditions. If only the word artificial were associated with the idea
[pic]
(57)  of art, or expert skill gained through voluntary apprenticeship
(instead of suggesting the factitious and unreal), we might say that
logical refers to artificial thought.
  Care, thoroughness, and exactness the marks of the logical
  In this sense, the word logical is synonymous with wide-awake, thorough,
and careful reflection ― thought in its best sense (ante, p. 5). Reflection
is turning a topic over in various aspects and in various lights so that
nothing significant about it shall be overlooked ― almost as one might turn
a stone over to see what its hidden side is like or what is covered by it.
Thoughtfulness means, practically, the same thing as careful attention; to
give our mind to a subject is to give heed to it, to take pains with it. In
speaking of reflection, we naturally use the words weigh, ponder,
deliberate ― terms implying a certain delicate and scrupulous balancing of
things against one another. Closely related names are scrutiny,
examination, consideration, inspection ― terms which imply close and
careful vision. Again, to think is to relate things to one another
definitely, to "put two and two together" as we say. Analogy with the
accuracy and definiteness of mathematical combinations gives us such
expressions as calculate, reckon, account for; and even reason itself ―
ratio. Caution, carefulness, thoroughness, definiteness, exactness,
orderliness, methodic arrangement, are, then, the traits by which we mark
off the logical from what is random and casual on one side, and from what
is academic and formal on the other.
  Whole object of intellectual education is formation of logical disposition
  No argument is needed to point out that the educator is concerned with the
logical in its practical and vital sense. Argument is perhaps needed to
show that the intellectual (as distinct from the moral) end of education is
entirely and only the logical in this sense; namely,
[pic]
  False opposition of the logical and the psychological
  (58)  the formation of careful, alert, and thorough habits of thinking.
The chief difficulty in the way of recognition of this principle is a false
conception of the relation between the psychological tendencies of an
individual and his logical achievements. If it be assumed ― as it is so
frequently ― that these have, intrinsically, nothing to do with each other,
then logical training is inevitably regarded as something foreign and
extraneous, something to be ingrafted upon the individual from without, so
that it is absurd to identify the object of education with the development
of logical power.
  Opposing the natural to the logical
  The conception that the psychology of individuals has no intrinsic
connections with logical methods and results is held, curiously enough, by
two opposing schools of educational theory. To one school, the natural[1]
is primary and fundamental; and its tendency is to make little of
distinctly intellectual nurture. Its mottoes are freedom, self-expression,
individuality, spontaneity, play, interest, natural unfolding, and so on.
In its emphasis upon individual attitude and activity, it sets slight store
upon organized subject-matter, or the material of study, and conceives
method to consist of various devices for stimulating and evoking, in their
natural order of growth, the native potentialities of individuals.
  Neglect of the innate logical resources
  The other school estimates highly the value of the logical, but conceives
the natural tendency of individuals to be averse, or at least indifferent,
to logical achievement. It relies upon subject-matter ― upon matter already
defined and classified. Method, then, has to do with the devices by which
these characteristics may be imported into a mind naturally reluctant and
re-
[pic]
  Identification of logical with subject-matter, exclusively
  (59-bellious. Hence its mottoes are discipline, instruction, restraint,
voluntary or conscious effort, the necessity of tasks, and so on. From this
point of view studies, rather than attitudes and habits, embody the logical
factor in education. The mind becomes logical only by learning to conform
to an external subject-matter. To produce this conformity, the study should
first be analyzed (by text-book or teacher) into its logical elements; then
each of these elements should be defined; finally, all of the elements,
should be arranged in series or classes according to logical formulae or
general principles. Then the pupil learns the definitions one by one; and
progressively adding one to another builds up the logical system, and
thereby is himself gradually imbued, from without, with logical quality.
  Illustration from geography
  This description will gain meaning through an illustration. Suppose the
subject is geography. The first thing is to give its definition, marking it
off from every other subject. Then the various abstract terms upon which
depends the scientific development of the science are stated and defined
one by one ― pole, equator, ecliptic, zone, ― from the simpler units to the
more complex which are formed out of them; then the more concrete elements
are taken in similar series: continent island, coast, promontory, cape,
isthmus, peninsula ocean, lake, coast, gulf, bay, and so on. In acquiring
this material, the mind is supposed not only to gain important information,
but, by accommodating itself to ready-made logical definitions,
generalizations, and classifications, gradually to acquire logical habits.
  from drawing
  This type of method has been applied to every subject taught in the
schools ― reading, writing, music, physics, grammar, arithmetic. Drawing,
for example,
[pic]
(60) has been taught on the theory that since all pictorial representation
is a matter of combining straight and curved lines, the simplest procedure
is to have the pupil acquire the ability first to draw straight lines in
various positions (horizontal, perpendicular, diagonals at various angles),
then typical curves; and finally, to combine straight and curved lines in
various permutations to construct actual pictures. This seemed to give the
ideal "logical" method, beginning with analysis into elements, and then
proceeding in regular order to more and more complex syntheses, each
element being defined when us ed, and thereby clearly understood.
  Formal method
  Even when this method in its extreme form is not followed, few schools
(especially of the middle or upper elementary grades) are free from an
exaggerated attention to forms supposedly employed by the pupil if he gets
his result logically. It is thought that there are certain steps arranged
in a certain order, which express preeminently an understanding of the
subject, and the pupil is made to " analyze " his procedure into these
steps, ie. to learn a certain routine formula of statement. While this
method is usually at its height in grammar and arithmetic, it invades also
history and even literature, which are then reduced, under plea of
intellectual training, to " outlines," diagrams, and schemes of division
and subdivision. In memorizing this simulated cut and dried copy of the
logic of an adult, the child generally is induced to stultify his own
subtle and vital logical movement. The. adoption by teachers of this
misconception of logical method has probably done more than anything else
to bring pedagogy into disrepute ; for to many persons " pedagogy " means
precisely a set of mechanical, self-conscious devices for replacing by some
[pic]
  (61) cast-iron external scheme the personal mental movement of the
individual.
  Reaction toward lack of form and method
  A reaction inevitably occurs from the poor results that accrue from these
professedly "logical" methods. Lack of interest in study, habits of
inattention and procrastination, positive aversion to intellectual
application, dependence upon sheer memorizing and mechanical routine with
only a modicum of understanding by the pupil of what he is about, show that
the theory of logical definition, division, gradation, and system does not
work out practically as it is theoretically supposed to work. The
consequent disposition ― as in every reaction ― is to go to the opposite
extreme. The " logical " is thought to be wholly artificial and extraneous;
teacher and pupil alike are to turn their backs upon it, and to work toward
the expression of existing aptitudes and tastes. Emphasis upon natural
tendencies and powers as the only possible starting-point of development is
indeed wholesome. But the reaction is false, and hence misleading, in what
it ignores and denies: the presence of genuinely intellectual factors in
existing powers and interests.
  Logic of subject-matter is logic of adult or trained
mind
  What is conventionally termed logical (namely, the logical from the
standpoint of subject-matter) represents in truth the logic of the trained
adult mind. Ability to divide a subject, to define its elements, and to
group them into classes according to general principles represents logical
capacity at its best point reached after thorough training. The mind that
habitually exhibits skill in divisions, definitions, generalizations, and
systematic recapitulations no longer needs training in logical methods. But
it is absurd to suppose that a mind which needs training because it cannot
perform these opera-
[pic]
(62) -tions can begin where the expert mind stops. The logical from the
standpoint of subject-matter represents the goal, the last term of
training, not the point of departure.
  The immature mind has its own logic
   
  Hence, the psychological and the logical represent the two ends of the
same movement
  In truth, the mind at every stage of development has its own logic. The
error of the notion that by appeal to spontaneous tendencies and by
multiplication of materials we may completely dismiss logical
considerations, lies in overlooking how large a part curiosity, inference,
experimenting, and testing already play in the pupil's life. Therefore it
underestimates the intellectual factor in the more spontaneous play and
work of individuals ― the factor that alone is truly educative. Any teacher
who is alive to the modes of thought naturally operative in the experience
of the normal child will have no difficulty in avoiding the identification
of the logical with a readymade organization of subject-matter, as well as
the notion that the only way to escape this error is to pay no attention to
logical considerations. Such a teacher will have no difficulty in seeing
that the real problem of intellectual education is the transformation of
natural powers into expert, tested powers: the transformation of more or
less casual curiosity and sporadic suggestion into attitudes of alert,
cautious, and thorough inquiry. He will see that the psychological and the
logical, in- stead of being opposed to each other (or even independent of
each other), are connected as the earlier and the later stages in one
continuous process of normal growth. The natural or psychological
activities, even when not consciously controlled by logical considerations,
have their own intellectual function and integrity; conscious and
deliberate skill in thinking, when it is achieved, makes habitual or second
nature. The first is already logical in spirit; the last, in presenting an
ingrained disposi-
[pic]
(63)-tion and attitude, is then as psychological (as personal) as any
caprice or chance impulse could be.
                                                 ? 2. Discipline and Freedom
  True and false notions of discipline
  Discipline of mind is thus, in truth, a result rather than a cause. Any
mind is disciplined in a subject in which independent intellectual
initiative and control have been achieved. Discipline represents original
native endowment turned) through gradual exercise, into effective power. So
far as a mind is disciplined, control of method in a given subject has been
attained so that the mind is able to manage itself independently without
external tutelage. The aim of education is precisely to develop
intelligence of this independent and effective type ― a disciplined mind.
Discipline is positive and constructive.
  Discipline as drill
  Discipline, however, is frequently regarded as something negative ― as a
painfully disagreeable forcing of mind away from channels congenial to it
into channels of constraint, a process grievous at the time but necessary
as preparation for a more or less remote future. Discipline is then
generally identified with drill; and drill is conceived after the
mechanical analogy of driving, by unremitting blows, a foreign substance
into a resistant material; or is imaged after the analogy of the mechanical
routine by which raw recruits are trained to a soldierly bearing and habits
that are naturally wholly foreign to their possessors. Training of this
latter sort, whether it be called discipline or not, is not mental
discipline. Its aim and result are not habits of thinking, but uniform
external modes of action. By failing to ask what he means by discipline,
many a teacher is misled into supposing that he is developing
[pic]
(64) mental force and efficiency by methods which in fact restrict and
deaden intellectual activity, and which tend to create mechanical routine,
or mental passivity and servility.
  As independent power or freedom
   
  Freedom and external spontaneity
  When discipline is conceived in intellectual terms (as the habitual power
of effective mental attack), it is identified with freedom in its true
sense. For freedom of mind means mental power capable of independent
exercise, emancipated from the leading strings of others, not mere
unhindered external operation. When spontaneity or naturalness is
identified with more or less casual discharge of transitory impulses, the
tendency of the educator is to supply a multitude of stimuli in order that
spontaneous activity may be kept up. All sorts of interesting materials,
equipments, tools, modes of activity, are provided in order that there may
be no flagging of free self-expression. This method overlooks some of the
essential conditions of the attainment of genuine freedom.
  Some obstacle necessary for thought
  (a) Direct immediate discharge or expression of an impulsive tendency is
fatal to thinking. Only when the impulse is to some extent checked and
thrown back upon itself does reflection ensue. It is, indeed, a stupid
error to suppose that arbitrary tasks must be imposed from without in order
to furnish the factor of perplexity and difficulty which is the necessary
cue to thought. Every vital activity of any depth and range inevitably
meets obstacles in the course of its effort to realize itself ― a fact that
renders the search for artificial or external problems quite superfluous.
The difficulties that present themselves within the development of an
experience are, however, to be cherished by the educator, not minimized,
for they are the natural stimuli
[pic]
(65) to reflective inquiry. Freedom does not consist in keeping up
uninterrupted and unimpeded external activity, but is something achieved
through conquering, by personal reflection, a way out of the difficulties
that prevent an immediate overflow and a spontaneous success.
  Intellectual factors are natural
  (b) The method that emphasizes the psychological and natural, but yet
fails to see what an important part of the natural tendencies is
constituted at every period of growth by curiosity, inference, and the
desire to test, cannot secure a natural development. In natural growth each
successive stage of activity prepares unconsciously, but thoroughly, the
conditions for the manifestation of the next stage -as in the cycle of a
plant's growth. There is no ground for assuming that "thinking" is a
special, isolated natural tendency that will bloom inevitably in due season
simply because various sense and motor activities have been freely
manifested before; or because observation, memory, imagination, and manual
skill have been previously exercised without thought. Only when thinking is
constantly employed in using the .senses and muscles for the guidance and
application of observations and movements, is the way prepared for
subsequent higher types of thinking.
  Genesis of thought contemporaneous with genesis of any human mental
activity
  At present, the notion is current that childhood is almost entirely
unreflective ― a period of mere sensory, motor, and memory development,
while adolescence suddenly brings the manifestation of thought and reason.
  Adolescence is not, however, a synonym for magic. Doubtless youth should
bring with it an enlargement of the horizon of childhood, a susceptibility
to larger concerns and issues, a more generous and a more general
standpoint toward nature and social life. This development affords an
opportunity for thinking of a more com-
[pic]
(66) -prehensive and abstract type than has previously obtained. But
thinking itself remains just what it has been all the time: a matter of
following up and testing the conclusions suggested by the facts and events
of life. Thinking begins as soon as the baby who has lost the ball that he
is playing with begins to foresee the possibility of something not yet
existing-its recovery; and begins to forecast steps toward the realization
of this possibility, and, by experimentation, to guide his acts by his
ideas and thereby also test the ideas. Only by making the most of the
thought-factor, already active in the experiences of childhood, is there
any promise or warrant for the emergence of superior reflective power at
adolescence, or at any later period.
  Fixation of bad mental habits
  (c) In any case positive habits are being formed: if not habits of careful
looking into things, then habits of hasty, heedless, impatient glancing
over the surface; if not habits of consecutively following up the
suggestions that occur, then habits of haphazard, grasshopper-like
guessing; if not habits of suspending judgment till inferences have been
tested by the examination of evidence, then habits of credulity alternating
with flippant incredulity, belief or unbelief being based, in either case,
upon whim, emotion, or accidental circumstances. The only way to achieve
traits of carefulness, thoroughness, and continuity (traits that are, as we
have seen, the elements of the "logical") is by exercising these traits
from the beginning, and by seeing to it that conditions call for their
exercise.
  Genuine freedom is intellectual not external
  Genuine freedom, in short, is intellectual; it rests in the trained power
of thought, in ability to " turn things over," to look at matters
deliberately, to judge whether the amount and kind of evidence requisite
for decision
[pic]
(67) is at hand, and if not, to tell where and how to seek such evidence.
If a man's actions are not guided by thoughtful conclusions, then they are
guided by inconsiderate impulse, unbalanced appetite, caprice, or the
circumstances of the moment. To cultivate unhindered, unreflective external
activity is to foster enslavement, for it leaves the person at the mercy of
appetite, sense, and circumstance.
                                                                       Notes
     1. Denoting whatever has to do with the natural constitution and
        functions of an individual.
Part Two: Logical Considerations
                        Chapter 6: The Analysis of a Complete Act of Thought
Object of Part Two
  AFTER a brief consideration in the first chapter of the nature of
reflective thinking, we turned, in the second, to the need for its
training. Then we took up the resources, the difficulties, and the aim of
its training. The purpose of this discussion was to set before the student
the general problem of the training of mind. The purport of the second
part, upon which we are now entering, is giving a fuller statement of the
nature and normal growth of thinking, preparatory to considering in the
concluding part the special problems that arise in connection with its
education.
  In this chapter we shall make an analysis of the process of thinking into
its steps or elementary constituents, basing the analysis upon descriptions
of a number of extremely simple, but genuine, cases of reflective
experience.[1]
  A simple case of practical deliberation
  I. "The other day when I was down town on 16th Street a clock caught my
eye. I saw that the hands pointed to 12.20. This suggested that I had an
engagement at 124th Street, at one o'clock. I reasoned that
[pic]
(69) as it had taken me an hour to come down on a surface car, I should
probably be twenty minutes late if I returned the same way. I might save
twenty minutes by a subway express. But was there a station near? If not, I
might lose more than twenty minutes in looking for one. Then I thought of
the elevated, and I saw there was such a line within two blocks. But where
was the station ? If it were several blocks above or below the street I was
on, I should lose time instead of gaining it. My mind went back to the
subway express as quicker than the elevated; furthermore, I remembered that
it went nearer than the elevated to the part Of I 124th Street I wished to
reach, so that time would be saved at the end of the journey. I concluded
in favor of the subway, and reached my destination by one o'clock."
  A simple case of reflection upon an observation
  2. "Projecting nearly horizontally from the upper deck of the ferryboat on
which I daily cross the river, is a long white pole, bearing a gilded ball
at its tip. It suggested a flagpole when I first saw it; its color shape,
and gilded ball agreed with this idea, and these reasons seemed to justify
me in this belief. But soon difficulties presented themselves. The pole was
nearly horizontal, an unusual position for a flagpole; in the next place,
there was no pulley, ring, or cord by which to attach a flag; finally,
there were elsewhere two vertical staffs from which flags were occasionally
flown. It seemed probable that the pole was not there for flag-flying.
  "I then tried to imagine all possible purposes of such a pole, and to
consider for which of these it was best suited : (a) Possibly it was an
ornament. But as all the ferryboats and even the tugboats carried like
poles,
[pic]
(70) this hypothesis was rejected. (b) Possibly it was the terminal of a
wireless telegraph. But the same considerations made this improbable.
Besides, the more natural place for such a terminal would be the highest
part of the boat, on top of the pilot house. (c) Its purpose might be to
point out the direction in which the boat is moving.
  "In support of this conclusion, I discovered that the pole was lower than
the pilot house, so that the steersman could easily see it. Moreover, the
tip was enough higher than the base, so that, from the pilot's position, it
must appear to project far out in front of the boat. Moreover, the pilot
being near the front of the boat, be would need some such guide as to its
direction. Tugboats would also need poles for such a purpose. This
hypothesis was so much more probable than the others that I accepted it. I
formed the conclusion that the pole was set up for the purpose of showing
the pilot the direction in which the boat pointed, to enable him to steer
correctly."
  A simple case of reflection involving experiment
  3. "In washing tumblers in hot soapsuds and placing them mouth downward on
a plate, bubbles appeared on the outside of the mouth of the tumblers and
then went inside. Why? The presence of bubbles suggests air, which I note
must come from inside the tumbler. I see that the soapy water on the plate
prevents escape of the air save as it may be caught in bubbles. But why
should air leave the tumbler ? There was no substance entering to force it
out. It must have expanded. It expands by increase of heat or by decrease
of pressure, or by both. Could the air have become heated after the tumbler
was taken from the hot suds? Clearly not the air that was already entangled
[pic]
(71) in the water. If heated air was the cause , cold air must have entered
in transferring the tumblers from the suds to the plate. I test to see if
this supposition is true by taking several more tumblers out. Some I shake
so as to make sure of entrapping cold air in them. Some I take out holding
mouth downward in order to prevent cold air from entering. Bubbles appear
on the outside of every one of the former and on none of the latter. I must
be right in my inference. Air from the outside must have been expanded by
the heat of the tumbler, which explains the appearance of the bubbles on
the outside.
  "But why do they then go inside? Cold contracts. The tumbler cooled and
also the air inside it. Tension was removed, and hence bubbles appeared
inside. To be sure of this, I test by placing a cup of ice on the tumbler
while the bubbles are still forming outside. They soon reverse."
  These three cases have been purposely selected so as to form a series from
the more rudimentary to more complicated cases of reflection. The first
illustrates the kind of thinking done by every one during the day's
business, in which neither the data, nor the ways of dealing with them,
take one outside the limits of everyday experience. The last furnishes a
case in which neither problem nor mode of solution would have been likely
to occur except to one with some prior scientific training. The second case
forms a natural transition; its materials lie well within the bounds of
everyday, unspecialized experience; but the problem, instead of being
directly involved in the person's business, arises indirectly out of his
activity, and accordingly appeals to a somewhat theoretic and impartial
interest. We
[pic]
(72) shall deal, in a later chapter, with the evolution of abstract
thinking out of that which is relatively practical and direct; here we are
concerned only with the common elements found in all the types.
  Five distinct steps in reflection
  Upon examination, each instance reveals, more or less clearly, five
logically distinct steps: (i) a felt difficulty; (ii) its location and
definition; (iii) suggestion of possible solution; (iv) development by
reasoning of the bearings of the suggestion; (v) further observation and
experiment leading to its acceptance or rejection; that is, the conclusion
of belief or disbelief.
  (a) in the lack of adaptation of means to end
  I. The first and second steps frequently fuse into one. The difficulty may
be felt with sufficient definiteness as to set the mind at once speculating
upon its probable solution, or an undefined uneasiness and shock may come
first, leading only later to definite attempt to find out what is the
matter. Whether the two steps are distinct or blended, there is the factor
emphasized in our original account of reflection―viz. the perplexity or
problem. In the first of the three cases cited, the difficulty resides in
the conflict between conditions at hand and a desired and intended result,
between an end and the means for reaching it. The purpose of keeping an
engagement at a certain time, and the existing hour taken in connection
with the location, are not congruous. The object of thinking is to
introduce congruity between the two. The given conditions cannot themselves
be altered; time will not go backward nor will the distance between 16th
Street and 124th Street shorten itself. The problem is the discovery of
intervening terms which when inserted between the remoter end and the given
means will harmonize them with each other.
[pic]
(73)
  (b) in identifying the character of the object
  In the second case, the difficulty experienced is the incompatibility of a
suggested and (temporarily) accepted belief that the pole is a flagpole,
with certain other facts. Suppose we symbolize the qualities that suggest
flagpole by the letters a, b, c; those that oppose this suggestion by the
letters p, q, r. There is, of course, nothing inconsistent in the qualities
themselves; but in pulling the mind to different and incongruous
conclusions they conflict ― hence the problem. Here the object is the
discovery of some object (0), of which a, b, c, and p, q, r, may all be
appropriate traits-just as, in our first case, it is to discover a course
of action which will combine existing conditions and a remoter result in a
single whole. The method of solution is also the same: discovery of
intermediate qualities (the position of the pilot house, of the pole, the
need of an index to the boat's direction) symbolized by d, g, 1, o, which
bind together otherwise incompatible traits.
  (c) in explaining an unexpected event
  In the third case, an observer trained to the idea of natural laws or
uniformities finds something odd or exceptional in the behavior of the
bubbles. The problem is to reduce the apparent anomalies to instances of
well-established laws. Here the method of solution is also to seek for
intermediary terms which will connect, by regular linkage, the seemingly
extraordinary movements of the bubbles with the conditions known to follow
from processes supposed to be operative.
  2. Definition of the difficulty
  2. As already noted, the first two steps, the feeling of a discrepancy, or
difficulty, and the acts of observation that serve to define the character
of the difficulty may, in a given instance, telescope together. In cases of
striking novelty or unusual perplexity, the difficulty, however, is likely
to present itself at first as a shock, as
[pic]
(74) emotional disturbance, as a more or less vague feeling of the
unexpected, of something queer, strange, funny, or disconcerting. In such
instances, there are necessary observations deliberately calculated to
bring to light just what is the trouble, or to make clear the specific
character of the problem. In large measure, the existence or non-existence
of this step makes the difference between reflection proper, or safeguarded
critical inference and uncontrolled thinking. Where sufficient pains to
locate the difficulty are not taken, suggestions for its resolution must be
more or less random. Imagine a doctor called in to prescribe for a patient.
The patient tells him some things that are wrong; his experienced eye, at a
glance, takes in other signs of a certain disease. But if he permits the
suggestion of this special disease to take possession prematurely of his
mind, to become an accepted conclusion, his scientific thinking is by that
much cut short. A large part of his technique, as a skilled practitioner,
is to prevent the acceptance of the first suggestions that arise; even,
indeed, to postpone the occurrence of any very definite suggestion till the
trouble ― the nature of the problem ― has been thoroughly explored. In the
case of a physician this proceeding is known as diagnosis, but a similar
inspection is required in every novel and complicated situation to prevent
rushing to a conclusion. The essence of critical thinking is suspended
judgment; and the essence of this suspense is inquiry to determine the
nature of the problem before proceeding to attempts at its solution. This,
more than any other thing, transforms mere inference into tested inference,
suggested conclusions into proof.
  3. The third factor is suggestion. The situation in
[pic]
  3. Occurance of a suggested explanation or possible solution
  (75) which the perplexity occurs calls up something not present to the
senses : the present location, the thought of subway or elevated train; the
stick before the eyes, the idea of a flagpole, an ornament, an apparatus
for wireless telegraphy; the soap bubbles, the law of expansion of bodies
through heat and of their contraction through cold. (a) Suggestion is the
very heart of inference ; it involves going from what is present to
something absent. Hence, it is more or less speculative, adventurous. Since
inference goes beyond what is actually present, it involves a leap, a jump,
the propriety of which cannot be absolutely warranted in advance, no matter
what precautions be taken. Its control is indirect, on the one hand,
involving the formation of habits of mind which are at once enterprising
and cautious; and on the other hand , involving the selection and
arrangement of the particular facts upon perception of which suggestion
issues. (b) The suggested conclusion so far as it is not accepted but only
tentatively entertained constitutes an idea. Synonyms for this are
supposition, conjecture, guess, hypothesis, and (in elaborate cases)
theory. Since suspended belief, or the postponement of a final conclusion
pending further evidence, depends partly upon the presence of rival
conjectures as to the best course to pursue or the probable explanation to
favor, cultivation of a variety of alternative suggestions is an important
factor in good thinking.
  4. The rational elaboration of an idea
  4. The process of developing the bearings ― or, as they are more
technically termed, the implications ― of any idea with respect to any
problem, is termed reasoning. [2] As an idea is inferred from given facts,
so reasoning
[pic]
(76) sets out from an idea. The idea of elevated road is developed into the
idea of difficulty of locating station, length of time occupied on the
journey, distance of station at the other end from place to be reached. In
the second case, the implication of a flagpole is seen to be a vertical
position; of a wireless apparatus, location on a high part of the ship and,
moreover, absence from every casual tugboat; while the idea of index to
direction in which the boat moves, when developed, is found to cover all
the details of the case.
  Reasoning has the same effect upon a suggested solution as more intimate
and extensive observation has upon the original problem. Acceptance of the
suggestion in its first form is prevented by looking into it more
thoroughly. Conjectures that seem plausible at first sight are often found
unfit or even absurd when their full consequences are traced out. Even when
reasoning out the bearings of a supposition does not lead to rejection, it
develops the idea into a form in which it is more apposite to the problem.
Only when, for example, the conjecture that a pole was an index-pole had
been thought out into its bearings could its particular applicability to
the case in hand be judged. Suggestions at first seemingly remote and wild
are frequently so transformed by being elaborated into what follows from
them as to become apt and fruitful. The development of an idea through
reasoning helps at least to supply the intervening or intermediate terms
that link together into a consistent whole apparently discrepant extremes
(ante, p. 72).
[pic]
  Corroboration of an idea and formation of a concluding belief
  (77)
  5. The concluding and conclusive step is some kind of experimental
corroboration, or verification, of the conjectural idea. Reasoning shows
that if the idea be adopted, certain consequences follow. So far the
conclusion is hypothetical or conditional. If we look and find present all
the conditions demanded by the theory, and if we find the characteristic
traits called for by rival alternatives to be lacking, the tendency to
believe, to accept, is almost irresistible. Sometimes direct observation
furnishes corroboration, as in the case of the pole on the boat. In other
cases, as in that of the bubbles, experiment is required; that is,
conditions are deliberately arranged in accord with the requirements of an
idea or hypothesis to see if the results theoretically indicated by the
idea actually occur. If it is found that the experimental results agree
with the theoretical, or rationally deduced, results, and if there is
reason to believe that only the conditions in question would yield such
results, the confirmation is so strong as to induce a conclusion at least
until contrary facts shall indicate the advisability of its revision.
  Thinking comes between observations at the beginning and at the end
  Observation exists at the beginning and again at the end of the process:
at the beginning, to determine more definitely and precisely the nature of
the difficulty to be dealt with; at the end, to test the value of some
hypothetically entertained conclusion. Between those two termini of
observation, we find the more distinctively mental aspects of the entire
thought-cycle : (i) inference, the suggestion of an explanation or
solution, (ii) reasoning, the development of the bearings and implications
of the suggestion. Reasoning requires some experimental observation to
confirm it, while experiment can be economically and fruitfully conducted
only
[pic]
(78) on the basis of an idea that has been tentatively developed by
reasoning.
  The trained mind one that judges the extent of each step advisable in a
given situation
  The disciplined, or logically trained, mind ― the aim of the educative
process -is the mind able to judge how far each of these steps needs to be
carried in any particular situation. No cast-iron rules can be laid down.
Each case has to be dealt with as it arises, on the basis of its importance
and of the context in which it occurs. To take too much pains in one case
is as foolish -as illogical ― as to take too little in another. At one
extreme, almost any conclusion that insures prompt and unified action may
be better than any long delayed conclusion; while at the other, decision
may have to be postponed for a long period ― perhaps for a lifetime. The
trained mind is the one that best grasps the degree of observation, forming
of ideas, reasoning, and experimental testing required in any special case,
and that profits the most, in future thinking, by mistakes made in the
past. What is important is that the mind should be sensitive to problems
and skilled in methods of attack and solution.
                                                                       Notes
     1. These are taken, almost verbatim, from the class papers of students.
     2. This term is sometimes extended to denote the entire reflective
        process-just as inference (which in the sense of test is best
        reserved for the third step) is sometimes used in the same broad
        sense. But reasoning (or ratiocination) seems to be peculiarly
        adapted to express what the older writers called the "notional " or
        " dialectic " process of developing the meaning of a given idea.
                    Chapter 7: Systematic Inference: Induction and Deduction
                                      ? I. The Double Movement of Reflection
Back and forth between facts and meanings
  THE characteristic outcome of thinking we saw to be the organization of
facts and conditions which, just as they stand, are isolated, fragmentary,
and discrepant, the organization being effected through the introduction of
connecting links, or middle terms. The facts as they stand are the data,
the raw material of reflection; their lack of coherence perplexes and
stimulates to reflection. There follows the suggestion of some meaning
which, if it can be substantiated, will give a whole in which various
fragmentary and seemingly incompatible data find their proper place. The
meaning suggested supplies a mental platform, an intellectual point of
view, from which to note and define the data more carefully, to seek for
additional observations, and to institute, experimentally, changed
conditions.
  Inductive and deductive
  There is thus a double movement in all reflection: a movement from the
given partial and confused data to a suggested comprehensive (or inclusive)
entire situation; and back from this suggested whole -which as suggested is
a meaning, an idea -to the particular facts, so as to connect these with
one another and with additional facts to which the suggestion has directed
attention. Roughly speaking, the first of these movements
[pic]
(80) is inductive; the second deductive. A complete act of thought involves
both -it involves, that is, a fruitful interaction of observed (or
recollected) particular considerations and of inclusive and far-reaching
(general) meanings.
  Hurry versus caution
  This double movement to and from a meaning may occur, however, in a
casual, uncritical way, or in a cautious and regulated manner. To think
means, in any case, to bridge a gap in experience, to bind together facts
or deeds otherwise isolated. But we may make only a hurried jump from one
consideration to another, allowing our aversion to mental disquietude to
override the gaps; or, we may insist upon noting the road traveled in
making connections. We may, in short, accept readily any suggestion that
seems plausible; or we may hunt out additional factors, new difficulties,
to see whether the suggested conclusion really ends the matter. The latter
method involves definite formulation of the connecting links; the statement
of a principle, or, in logical phrase, the use of a universal. If we thus
formulate the whole situation, the original data are transformed into
premises of reasoning; the final belief is a logical or rational
conclusion, not a mere de facto termination.
  Continuity of relationship the mark of the latter
  The importance of connections binding isolated items into a coherent
single whole is embodied in all the phrases that denote the relation of
premises and conclusions to each other. (i) The premises are called
grounds, foundations, bases, and are said to underlie, uphold, support the
conclusion. (2) We " descend " from the premises to the conclusion, and "
ascend " or "mount " in the opposite direction ― as, a river may be
continuously traced from source to sea or vice versa. So the conclusion
springs, flows, or is drawn from its premises.
[pic]
(81)
  (3) The conclusion -as the word itself implies ― closes, shuts in, locks
up together the various factors stated in the premises. We say that the
premises " contain " the conclusion, and that the conclusion " contains "
the premises, thereby marking our sense of the inclusive and comprehensive
unity in which the elements of reasoning are bound tightly together.[1]
Systematic inference, in short, means the recognition of definite relations
of interdependence between considerations previously unorganized and
disconnected, this recognition being brought about by the discovery and
insertion of new facts and properties.
  Scientific induction and deduction
  This more systematic thinking is, however, like the cruder forms in its
double movement, the movement toward the suggestion or hypothesis and the
movement back to facts. The difference is in the greater conscious care
with which each phase of the process is performed. The conditions under
which suggestions are allowed to spring up and develop are regulated. Hasty
acceptance of any idea that is plausible, that seems to solve the
difficulty, is changed into a conditional acceptance pending further
inquiry. The idea is accepted as a working hypothesis, as something to
guide investigation and bring to light new facts, not as a final
conclusion. When pains are taken to make each aspect of the movement as
accurate as possible, the movement toward building up the idea is known as
inductive discovery (induction, for short); the movement toward developing,
applying, and testing, as deductive proof (deduction, for short).
  While induction moves from fragmentary details (or
[pic]
  Particular and universal
  (82) particulars) to a connected view of a situation (universal),
deduction begins with the latter and works back again to particulars,
connecting them and binding them together. The inductive movement is toward
discovery of a binding principle; the deductive toward its testing
confirming, refuting, modifying it on the basis of its capacity to
interpret isolated details into a unified experience. So far as we conduct
each of these processes in the light of the other, we get valid discovery
or verified critical thinking.
  Illustration from everyday experience
  A commonplace illustration may enforce the points of this formula. A man
who has left his rooms in order finds them upon his return in a state of
confusion, articles being scattered at random. Automatically, the notion
comes to his mind that burglary would account for the disorder. He has not
seen the burglars; their presence is not a fact of observation, but is a
thought, an idea. Moreover, the man has no special burglars in mind; it is
the relation, the meaning of burglary ― something general ― that comes to
mind. The state of his room is perceived and is particular, definite, ―
exactly as it is; burglars are inferred, and have a general status. The
state of the room is a fact, certain and speaking for itself ; the presence
of burglars is a possible meaning which may explain the facts.
  of induction,
  So far there is an inductive tendency, suggested by particular and present
facts. In the same inductive way, it occurs to him that his children are
mischievous, and that they may have thrown the things about. This rival
hypothesis (or conditional principle of explanation) prevents him from
dogmatically accepting the first suggestion. judgment is held in suspense
and a positive conclusion postponed.
[pic]
  of deduction
  (83) Then deductive movement begins. Further observations, recollections,
reasonings are conducted on the basis of a development of the ideas
suggested: if burglars were responsible, such and such things would have
happened; articles of value would be missing. Here the man is going from a
general principle or relation to special features that accompany it, to
particulars, -not back, however, merely to the original particulars (which
would be fruitless or take him in a circle), but to new details, the actual
discovery or nondiscovery of which will test the principle. The man turns
to a box of valuables; some things are gone; some, however, are still
there. Perhaps he has himself removed the missing articles, but has
forgotten it. His experiment is not a decisive, test. He thinks of the
silver in the sideboard ― the children would not have taken that nor would
he absentmindedly have changed its place. He looks; all the solid ware is
gone. The conception of burglars is confirmed; examination of windows and
doors shows that they have been tampered with. Belief culminates; the
original isolated facts have been woven into a coherent fabric. The idea
first suggested (inductively) has been employed to reason out
hypothetically certain additional particulars not yet experienced, that
ought to be there, if the suggestion is correct. Then new acts of
observation have shown that the particulars theoretically called for are
present, and by this process the hypothesis is strengthened, corroborated.
This moving back and forth between the observed f acts and the conditional
idea is kept up till a coherent experience of an object is substituted for
the experience of conflicting details -or else the whole matter is given up
as a bad job.
  Sciences exemplify similar attitudes and operations,
[pic]
  Science is the same operations carefully performed
  (84) but with a higher degree of elaboration of the instruments of
caution, exactness and thoroughness. This greater elaboration brings about
specialization, an accurate marking off of various types of problems from
one another, and a corresponding segregation and classification of the
materials of experience associated with each type of problem. We shall
devote the remainder of this chapter to a consideration of the devices by
which the discovery, the development, and the testing of meanings are
scientifically carried on.
                                     ? 2. Guidance of the Inductive Movement
  Guidance is indirect
  Control of the formation of suggestion is necessarily indirect, not
direct; imperfect, not perfect. just because all discovery, all
apprehension involving thought of the new, goes from the known, the
present, to the unknown and absent, no rules can be stated that will
guarantee correct inference. Just what is suggested to a person in a given
situation depends upon his native constitution (his originality, his
genius), temperament, the prevalent direction of his interests, his early
environment, the general tenor of his past experiences, his special
training, the things that have recently occupied him continuously or
vividly, and so on; to some extent even upon an accidental conjunction of
present circumstances. These matters, so far as they lie in the past or in
external conditions, clearly escape regulation. A suggestion simply does or
does not occur; this or that -suggestion just happens, occurs, springs up.
If, however, prior experience and training have developed an attitude of
patience in a condition of doubt, a capacity for suspended judgment, and a
liking for inquiry, indirect control of the course of suggestions is
possible.
[pic]
(85) The individual may return upon, revise, restate, enlarge, and analyze
the facts out of which suggestion springs. Inductive methods, in the
technical sense, all have to do with regulating the conditions under which
observation, memory, and the acceptance of the testimony of others (the
operations supplying the raw data) proceed.
  Method of indirect regulation
  Given the facts A B C D on one side and certain individual habits on the
other, suggestion occurs automatically. But if the facts A B C D are
carefully looked into and thereby resolved into the facts A' B" R S, a
suggestion will automatically present itself different from that called up
by the facts in their first form. To inventory the facts, to describe
exactly and minutely their respective traits, to magnify artificially those
that are obscure and feeble, to reduce artificially those that are so
conspicuous and glaring as to be distracting, ― these are ways of modifying
the facts that exercise suggestive force, and thereby indirectly guiding
the formation of suggested inferences.
  Illustration from diagnosis
  Consider, for example, how a physician makes his diagnosis-his inductive
interpretation. If he is scientifically trained, he suspends ― postpones ―
reaching a conclusion in order that he may not be led by superficial
occurrences into a snap judgment. Certain conspicuous phenomena may
forcibly suggest typhoid, but he avoids a conclusion, or even any strong
preference for this or that conclusion until he has greatly (i) enlarged
the scope of his data, and (ii) rendered them more minute. He not only
questions the patient as to his feelings and as to his acts prior to the
disease, but by various manipulations with his hands (and with instruments
made for the purpose) brings to light a large number of facts of which the
patient is quite unaware. The state of tem-
[pic]
(86) -perature, respiration, and heart-action is accurately noted, and
their fluctuations from time to time are exactly recorded. Until this
examination has worked out toward a wider collection and in toward a
minuter scrutiny of details, induction is deferred.
  Summary: definition of scientific induction
  Scientific induction means, in short, all the processes by which the
observing and amassing of data are regulated with a view to facilitating
the formation of explanatory conceptions and theories. These devices are
all directed toward selecting the precise facts to which weight and
significance shall attach in forming suggestions or ideas. Specifically,
this selective determination involves devices of (I) elimination by
analysis of what is likely to be misleading and irrelevant, (2) emphasis of
the important by collection and comparison of cases, (3) deliberate
construction of data by experimental variation.
  Elimination of irrelevant meanings
  (I) It is a common saying that one must learn to dist criminate between
observed facts and judgments based upon them. Taken literally, such advice
cannot be carried out; in every observed thing there is-if the thing have
any meaning at all -some consolidation of meaning with what is sensibly and
physically present, such that, if this were entirely excluded, what is left
would have no sense. A says: "I saw my brother." The term brother, however,
involves a relation that cannot be sensibly or physically observed; it is
inferential in status. If A contents himself with saying, I saw a man," the
factor of classification, of intellectual reference, is less complex, but
still exists. If, as a last resort, A were to say, "Anyway, I saw a colored
object," some relationship, though more rudimentary and undefined, still
subsists. Theoretically, it is possible that no
[pic]
(87) object was there, only an unusual mode of nerve stimulation. None the
less, the advice to discriminate what is observed from what is inferred is
sound practical advice. Its working import is that one should eliminate or
exclude those inferences as to which experience has shown that there is
greatest liability to error. This, of course, is a relative matter. Under
ordinary circumstances no reasonable doubt would attach to the observation,
" I see my brother "; it would be pedantic and silly to resolve this
recognition back into a more elementary form. Under other circumstances it
might be perfectly genuine question as to whether A saw even a colored
thing, or whether the color was due to a stimulation of the sensory optical
apparatus (like " seeing stars " upon a blow) or to a disordered
circulation. In general, the scientific man is one who knows that he is
likely to be hurried to a conclusion, and that part of this precipitancy is
due to certain habits which tend to make him "read" certain meanings into
the situation that confronts him, so that he must be on the lookout against
errors arising from his interests, habits, and current preconceptions.
  The technique of conclusion
  The technique of scientific inquiry thus consists in various processes
that tend to exclude over-hasty " reading in " of meanings; devices that
aim to give a purely "objective " unbiased rendering of the data to be
interpreted. Flushed cheeks usually mean heightened temperature; paleness
means lowered temperature. The clinical thermometer records automatically
the actual temperature and hence checks up the habitual associations that
might lead to error in a given case. All the instrumentalities of
observation -the various -meters and -graphs and -scopes ― fill a part
[pic]
(88) of their scientific role in helping to eliminate meanings supplied
because of habit, prejudice, the strong momentary preoccupation of
excitement and anticipation, and by the vogue of existing theories.
Photographs, phonographs, kymographs, actinographs, seismographs,
plethysmographs, and the like, moreover, give records that are permanent,
so that they can be employed by different persons, and by the same person
in different states of mind, i.e. under the influence of varying
expectations and dominant beliefs. Thus purely personal prepossessions (due
to habit, to desire, to after-effects of recent experience) may be largely
eliminated. In ordinary language, the facts are objectively, rather than
subjectively, determined. In this way tendencies to premature
interpretation are held in check.
  Collection of instances
  (2) Another important method of control consists in the multiplication of
cases or instances. If I doubt whether a certain handful gives a fair
sample, or representative, for purposes of judging value, of a whole car
load of grain, I take a number of handfuls from various parts of the car
and compare them. If they agree in quality, well and good; if they
disagree, we try to get enough samples so that when they are thoroughly
mixed the result will be a fair basis for an evaluation. This illustration
represents roughly the value of that aspect of scientific control in
induction which insists upon I multiplying observations instead of basing
the conclusion upon one or a few cases.
  This method not the whole of induction
  So prominent, indeed, is this aspect of inductive method that it is
frequently treated as the whole of induction. It is supposed that all
inductive inference is based upon collecting and comparing a number of like
cases. But in fact such comparison and collection is a
[pic]
(89)secondary development within the process of securing a correct
conclusion in some single case. If a man infers from a single sample of
grain as to the grade of wheat of the car as a whole, it is induction and,
under certain circumstances, a sound induction; other cases are resorted to
simply for the sake of rendering that induction more guarded, and more
probably correct. In like fashion, the reasoning that led up to the
burglary idea in the instance already cited (p. 83) was inductive, though
there was but one single case examined. The particulars upon which the
general meaning (or relation) of burglary was grounded were simply the sum
total of the unlike items and qualities that made up the one case examined.
Had this case presented very great obscurities and difficulties, recourse
might then have been had to examination of a number of similar cases. But
this comparison would not make inductive a process which was not previously
of that character; it would only render induction more wary and adequate.
The object of bringing into consideration a multitude of cases is to
facilitate the selection of the evidential or significant features upon
which to base inference in some single case.
  Contrast as important as likeness
  Accordingly, points of unlikeness are as important as points of likeness
among the cases examined. Comparison, without contrast, does not amount to
anything logically. In the degree in which other cases observed or
remembered merely duplicate the case in question, we are no better off for
purposes of inference than if we had permitted our single original fact to
dictate a conclusion. In the case of the various samples of grain, it is
the fact that the samples are unlike, at least in the part of the carload
from which they are taken, that is important. Were it not for this
unlikeness, their like-
[pic]
(90)-ness in quality would be of no avail in assisting inference.[2] If we
are endeavoring to get a child to regulate his conclusions about the
germination of a seed by taking into account a number of instances, very
little is gained if the conditions in all these instances closely
approximate one another. But if one seed is placed in pure sand, another in
loam, and another on blotting-paper, and if in each case there are two
conditions, one with and another without moisture, the unlike factors tend
to throw into relief the factors that are significant (or "essential ") for
reaching a conclusion. Unless, in short, the observer takes care to have
the differences in the observed cases as extreme as conditions allow, and
unless he notes unlikenesses as carefully as likenesses, he has no way of
determining the evidential force of the data that confront him.
  Importance of exceptions and contrary cases
  Another way of bringing out this importance of unlikeness is the emphasis
put by the scientist upon negative cases ― upon instances which it would
seem ought to fall into line but which as matter of fact do not. Anomalies,
exceptions, things which agree in most respects but disagree in some
crucial point, are so important that many of the devices of scientific
technique are designed purely to detect, record, and impress upon memory
contrasting cases. Darwin remarked that so easy is it to pass over cases
that oppose a favorite generalization, that he had made it a habit not
merely to hunt for contrary instances, but also to write down any exception
he noted or thought of ― as otherwise it was almost sure to be forgotten.
[pic]
                                   ? 3. Experimental Variation of Conditions
  Experiment the typical method of introducing contrast factors
  We have already trenched upon this factor of inductive method, the one
that is the most important of all wherever it is feasible. Theoretically,
one sample case of the right kind will be as good a basis for an inference
as a thousand cases; but cases of the "right kind " rarely turn up
spontaneously. We have to search for them, and we may have to make them. If
we take cases just as we find them-whether one case or many cases -they
contain much that is irrelevant to the problem in hand, while much that is
relevant is obscure, hidden. The object of experimentation is the
construction, by regular steps taken on the basis of a plan thought out in
advance, of a typical, crucial case, a case formed with express reference
to throwing light on the difficulty in question. All inductive methods rest
(as already stated, P. 85) upon regulation of the conditions of observation
and memory; experiment is simply the most adequate regulation possible of
these conditions. We try to make the observation such that every factor
entering into it, together with the mode and the amount of its operation,
may be open to recognition. Such making of observations constitutes
experiment.
  Three advantages of experiment
  Such observations have many and obvious advantages over observations ― no
matter how extensive ― with respect to which we simply wait for an event to
happen or an object to present itself. Experiment overcomes the defects due
to (a) the rarity, (b) the subtlety and minuteness (or the violence), and
(c) the rigid fixity of facts as we ordinarily experience them. The
following quotations from Jevons's Elementary Lessons in Logic bring out
all these points :
  (i) " We might have to wait years or centuries to meet
[pic]
(92) accidentally with facts which we can readily produce at any moment in
a laboratory; and it is probable that most of the chemical substances now
known, and many excessively useful products would never have been
discovered at all by waiting till nature presented them spontaneously to
our observation."
  This quotation refers to the infrequency or rarity of certain facts of
nature, even very important ones. The passage then goes on to speak of the
minuteness of many phenomena which makes them escape ordinary experience :
  (ii) "Electricity doubtless operates in every particle of matter, perhaps
at every moment of time; and even the ancients could not but notice its
action in the loadstone, in lightning, in the Aurora Borealis, or in a
piece of rubbed amber. But in lightning electricity was too intense and
dangerous; in the other cases it was too feeble to be properly understood.
The science of electricity and magnetism could only advance by getting
regular supplies of electricity from the common electric machine or the
galvanic battery and by making powerful electromagnets. Most, if not all,
the effects which electricity produces must go on in nature, but altogether
too obscurely for observation."
  Jevons then deals with the fact that, under ordinary conditions of
experience, phenomena which can be understood only by seeing them under
varying conditions are presented in a fixed and uniform way.
  (iii) " Thus carbonic acid is only met in the form of a gas, proceeding
from the combustion of carbon; but when exposed to extreme pressure and
cold, it is condensed into a liquid, and may even be converted into a
snowlike solid substance. Many other gases have in
[pic]
(93) like manner been liquefied or solidified, and there is reason to
believe that every substance is capable of taking all three forms of solid,
liquid, and gas, if only the conditions of temperature and pressure can be
sufficiently varied. Mere observation of nature would have led us, on the
contrary, to suppose that nearly all substances were fixed in one condition
only, and could not be converted from solid into liquid and from liquid
into gas."
  Many volumes would be required to describe in detail all the methods that
investigators have developed in various subjects for analyzing and
restating the facts of ordinary experience so that we may escape from
capricious and routine suggestions, and may get the facts in such a form.
and in such a light (or context) that exact and far-reaching explanations
may be suggested in place of vague and limited ones. But these various
devices of inductive inquiry all have one goal in view: the indirect
regulation of the function of suggestion, or formation of ideas; and, in
the main, they will be found to reduce to some combination of the three
types of selecting and arranging subject-matter just described.
                                     ? 4. Guidance of the Deductive Movement
  Value of deduction for guiding induction
  Before dealing directly with this topic, we must note that systematic
regulation of induction depends upon the possession of a body of general
principles that may be applied deductively to the examination or
construction of particular cases as they come up. If the physician does not
know the general laws of the physiology of the human body, he has little
way of telling what is either peculiarly significant or peculiarly
exceptional in any particular case that he is called upon to treat. If he
knows the laws of circulation, digestion, and respiration, be can deduce
the conditions that should normally be found in a given case. These
considerations give a base line from which the deviations and abnormalities
of a particular case may be measured. In this way, the nature of the
problem at hand is located and defined. Attention is not wasted upon
features which though conspicuous have nothing to do with the case; it is
concentrated upon just those traits which are out of the way and hence
require explanation. A question well put is half answered; i.e. a
difficulty clearly apprehended is likely to suggest its own solution,
-while a vague and miscellaneous perception of. the problem leads to
groping and fumbling. Deductive systems are necessary in order to put the
question in a fruitful form.
  Reasoning a thing out
  The control of the origin and development of hypotheses by deduction does
not cease, however, with locating the problem. Ideas as they first present
themselves are inchoate and incomplete. Deduction is their elaboration into
fullness and completeness of meaning (see P. 76). The phenomena which the
physician isolates from the total mass of facts that exist in front of him
suggest, we will say, typhoid fever. Now this conception of typhoid fever
is one that is capable of development. If there is typhoid, wherever there
is typhoid, there are certain results, certain characteristic symptoms. By
going over mentally the full bearing of the concept of typhoid, the
scientist is instructed as to further phenomena to be found. Its
development gives him an instrument of inquiry, of observation and
experimentation. He can go to work deliberately to see whether
[pic]
(95) the case presents those features that it should have if the
supposition is valid. The deduced results form a basis for comparison with
observed results. Except where there is a system of principles capable of
being elaborated by theoretical reasoning, the process of testing (or
proof) of a hypothesis is incomplete and haphazard.
  Such reasoning implies systematized knowledge
  These considerations indicate the method by which the deductive movement
is guided. Deduction requires a system of allied ideas which may be
translated into one another by regular or graded steps. The question is
whether the facts that confront us can be identified as typhoid fever. To
all appearances, there is a great gap between them and typhoid. But if we
can, by some method of substitutions, go through a series of intermediary
terms (see P. 72), the gap may, after all, be easily bridged. Typhoid may
mean p which in turn means o, which means n which means m, which is very
similar to the data selected as the key to the problem.
  or definition and classification
  One of the chief objects of science is to provide for every typical branch
of subject-matter a set of meanings and principles so closely interknit
that any one implies some other according to definite conditions, which
under certain other conditions implies another, and so on. In this way,
various substitutions of equivalents are possible, and reasoning can trace
out, without having recourse to specific observations, very remote
consequences of any suggested principle. Definition, general formulae, and
classification arc the devices by which the fixation and elaboration of a
meaning into its detailed ramifications are carried on. They are not ends
in themselves ― as they are frequently regarded even in elementary
education ― but instrumentalities for facilitating
[pic]
(96) the development of a conception into the form where its applicability
to given facts may best be tested.[3]
  The final control of deduction
  The final test of deduction lies in experimental observation. Elaboration
by reasoning may make a suggested idea very rich and very plausible, but it
will not settle the validity of that idea. Only if facts can be observed
(by methods either of collection or of experimentation), that agree in
detail and without exception with the deduced results, are we justified in
accepting the deduction as giving a valid conclusion. Thinking, in short,
must end as well as begin in the domain of concrete observations, if it is
to be complete thinking. And the ultimate educative value of all deductive
processes is measured by the degree to which they become working tools in
the creation and development of new experiences.
                            ? 5. Some Educational Bearings of the Discussion
  Educational counterparts of false logical theories
  Some of the points of the foregoing logical analysis may be clinched by a
consideration of their educational implications, especially with reference
to certain practices that grow out of a false separation by which each is
thought to be independent of the other and complete in itself. (i) In some
school subjects, or at all events in some topics or in some lessons, the
pupils are immersed in details; their minds are loaded with disconnected
items (whether gleaned by observation and memory, or accepted on hearsay
and authority). Induction is treated as beginning and ending with the
amassing of facts, of particular isolated pieces of information. That these
items are educative only as suggesting a view of some larger situation in
which the
[pic]
(97) particulars are included and thereby accounted for, is ignored. In
object lessons in elementary education and in laboratory instruction in
higher education, the subject is often so treated that the student fails to
"see the forest on account of the trees." Things and their qualities are
retailed and detailed without reference to a more general character which
they stand for and mean. Or, in the laboratory, the student becomes
engrossed in the processes of manipulation, ― irrespective of the reason
for their performance, without recognizing a typical problem for the
solution of which they afford the appropriate method. Only deduction brings
out and emphasizes consecutive relationships, and only when relationships
are held in view does learning become more than a miscellaneous scrap-bag.
  Failure to follow up by reasoning
  (ii) Again, the mind is allowed to hurry on to a vague notion of the whole
of which the fragmentary facts are portions, without any attempt to become
conscious of how they are bound together as parts of this whole. The
student feels that" in a general way," as we say, the facts of the history
or geography lesson are related thus and so; but " in a general way " here
stands only for "in a vague way," somehow or other, with no clear
recognition of just how.
  The pupil is encouraged to form, on the basis of the particular facts, a
general notion, a conception of how they stand related; but no pains are
taken to make the student follow up the notion, to elaborate it and see
just what its bearings are upon the case in hand and upon similar cases.
The inductive inference, the guess, is formed by the student; if it happens
to be correct, it is at once accepted by the teacher ; or if it is false,
it is rejected. If any amplification of the idea occurs, it is
[pic]
(98) quite likely carried through by the teacher, who thereby assumes the
responsibility for its intellectual development. But a complete, an
integral, act of thought requires that the person making the suggestion
(the guess) be responsible also for reasoning out its bearings upon the
problem in hand ; that he develop the suggestion at least enough to
indicate the ways in which it applies to and accounts for the specific data
of the case. Too often when a recitation does not consist in simply testing
the ability of the student to display some form of technical skill, or to
repeat facts and principles accepted on the authority of textbook or
lecturer, the teacher goes to the opposite extreme; and after calling out
the spontaneous reflections of the pupils, their guesses or ideas about the
matter, merely accepts or rejects them, assuming himself the responsibility
for their elaboration. In this way, the function of suggestion and of
interpretation is excited, but it is not directed and trained. Induction is
stimulated but is not carried over into the reasoning phase necessary to
complete it.
  In other subjects and topics, the deductive phase is isolated, and is
treated as if it were complete in itself. This false isolation may show
itself in either (and both) of two points; namely, at the beginning or at
the end of the resort to general intellectual procedure.
  Isolation of deduction by commencing with it
  (iii) Beginning with definitions, rules, general principles,
classifications, and the like, is a common form of the first error. This
method has been such a uniform object of attack on the part of all
educational reformers that it is not necessary to dwell upon it further
than to note that the mistake is, logically, due to the attempt to
introduce deductive considerations without first making acquaintance with
the particular facts that
[pic]
(99) create a need for the generalizing rational devices. Unfortunately,
the reformer sometimes carries his objection too far, or rather locates it
in the wrong place. He is led into a tirade against all definition, all
systematization, all use of general principles, instead of confining
himself to pointing out their futility and their deadness when not properly
motivated by familiarity with concrete experiences.
  Isolation of deduction from direction of new observations
  (iv) The isolation of deduction is seen, at the other end, wherever there
is failure to clinch and test the results of the general reasoning
processes by application to new concrete cases. The final point of the
deductive devices lies in their use in assimilating and comprehending
individual cases. No one understands a general principle fully ― no matter
how adequately he can demonstrate it, to say nothing of repeating it -till
he can employ it in the mastery of new situations, which, if they are new,
differ in manifestation from the cases used in reaching the generalization.
Too often the textbook or teacher is contented with a series of somewhat
perfunctory examples and illustrations, and the student is not forced to
carry the principle that he has formulated over into further cases of his
own experience. In so far, the principle is inert and dead.
  Lack of provision for experimentation
  (v) It is only a variation upon this same theme to say that every complete
act of reflective inquiry makes provision for experimentation ― for testing
suggested and accepted principles by employing them for the active
construction of new cases, in which new qualities emerge. Only slowly do
our schools accommodate themselves to the general advance of scientific
method. From the scientific side, it is demonstrated that effective and
integral thinking is possible only where the experi-
[pic]
(100) -mental method in some form is used. Some recognition of this
principle is evinced in higher institutions of learning, colleges and high
schools. But in elementary education, it is still assumed, for the most
part, that the pupil's natural range of observations, supplemented by what
he accepts on hearsay, is adequate for intellectual growth. Of course it is
not necessary that laboratories shall be introduced under that name, much
less that elaborate apparatus be secured; but the entire scientific history
of humanity demonstrates that the conditions for complete mental activity
will not be obtained till adequate provision is made for the carrying on of
activities that actually modify physical conditions, and that books,
pictures, and even objects that are passively observed but not manipulated
do not furnish the provision required.
                                                                       Notes
     1. See Vailati, Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific
        Methods, Vol. V, No. 12.
     2. In terms of the phrases used in logical treatises, the so-called
        "methods of agreement" (comparison) and "difference" (contrast) must
        accompany each other or constitute a "joint method " in order to be
        of logical use.
     3. These processes are further discussed in Chapter IX
                            Chapter 8: Judgment: the Interpretation of Facts
                                             I. The Three Factors of Judging
Good judgment
  A MAN of good judgment in a given set of affairs is a man in so far
educated, trained, whatever may be his literacy. And if our schools turn
out their pupils in that attitude of mind which is conducive to good
judgment in any department of affairs in which the pupils are placed, they
have done more than if they sent out their pupils merely possessed of vast
stores of information, or high degrees of skill in specialized branches. To
know what is good judgment we need first to know what judgment is.
  Judgment and inference
  That there is an intimate connection between judgment and inference is
obvious enough. The aim of inference is to terminate itself in an adequate
judgment of a situation, and the course of inference goes on through a
series of partial and tentative judgments. What are these units, these
terms of inference when we examine them on their own account? Their
significant traits may be readily gathered from a consideration of the
operations to which the word judgment was originally applied : namely, the
authoritative decision of matters in legal controversy ― the procedure of
the judge on the bench. There are three such features : (I) a controversy,
consisting of opposite claims regarding the same objective situation; (2) a
process of defining and elaborating these claims and of sifting the facts
adduced to
[pic]
(102) support them; (3) a final decision, or sentence, closing the
particular matter in dispute and also serving as a rule or principle for
deciding future cases.
  Uncertainty the antecedent of judgment
  I. Unless there is something doubtful, the situation is read off at a
glance; it is taken in on sight, i.e. there is merely apprehension,
perception, recognition, not judgment. If the matter is wholly doubtful, if
it is dark and obscure throughout, there is a blind mystery and again no
judgment occurs. But if it suggests, however vaguely, different meanings,
rival possible interpretations, there is some point at issue, some matter
at stake. Doubt takes the form of dispute, controversy; different sides
compete for a conclusion in their favor. Cases brought to trial before a
judge illustrate neatly and unambiguously this strife of alternative
interpretations; but any case of trying to clear up intellectually a
doubtful situation exemplifies the same traits. A moving blur catches our
eye in the distance; we ask ourselves: "What is it? Is it a cloud of
whirling dust? a tree waving its branches? a man signaling to us? "
Something in the total situation suggests each of these possible meanings.
Only one of them can possibly be sound; perhaps none of them is
appropriate; yet some meaning the thing in question surely has. Which of
the alternative suggested meanings has the rightful claim? What does the
perception really mean? How is it to be interpreted, estimated, appraised,
placed? Every judgment proceeds from some such situation.
  Judgment defines the issue,
  2. The hearing of the controversy, the trial, i.e. the weighing of
alternative claims, divides into two branches, either of which, in a given
case, may be more conspicuous than the other. In the consideration of a
legal dispute, these two branches are sifting the evidence and
[pic]
(103) selecting the rules that are applicable; they are "the facts" and
"the law" of the case. In judgment they are (a) the determination of the
data that are important in the given case (compare the inductive movement);
and (b) the elaboration of the conceptions or meanings suggested by the
crude data (compare the deductive movement). (a) What portions or aspects
of the situation are significant in controlling the formation of the
interpretation? (b) just what is the full meaning and bearing of the
conception that is used as a method of interpretation ? These questions are
strictly correlative; the answer to each depends upon the answer to the
other. We may, however, for convenience, consider them separately.
  (a) by selecting what facts are evidence
  (a) In every actual occurrence, there are many details which are part of
the total occurrence, but which nevertheless are not significant in
relation to the point at issue. All parts of an experience are equally
present, but they are very far from being of equal value as signs or as
evidences. Nor is there any tag or label on any trait saying: "This is
important," or " This is trivial." Nor is intensity, or vividness or
conspicuousness, a safe measure of indicative and proving value. The
glaring thing may be totally insignificant in this particular situation,
and the key to the understanding of the whole matter may be modest or
hidden (compare P. 74). Features that are not significant are distracting;
they proffer their claims to be regarded as clues and Cues to
interpretation, while traits that are significant do not appear on the
surface at all. Hence, judgment is required even in reference to the
situation or event that is present to the senses; elimination or rejection,
selection, discovery, or bringing to light must take place.
[pic]
(104) Till we have reached a final conclusion, rejection and selection must
be tentative or conditional. We select the things that we hope or trust are
cues to meaning. But if they do not suggest a situation that accepts and
includes them (see p. 8 1), we reconstitute our data, the facts of the
case; for we mean, intellectually, by the facts of the case those traits
that are used as evidence in reaching a conclusion or forming a decision.
  Expertness in selecting evidence
  No hard and fast rules for this operation of selecting and rejecting, or
fixing upon the facts, can be given. It all comes back, as we say, to the
good judgment, the good sense, of the one judging. To be a good judge is to
have a sense of the relative indicative or signifying values of the various
features of the perplexing situation; to know what to let go as of no
account; what to eliminate as irrelevant; what to retain as conducive to
outcome; what to emphasize as a clue to the difficulty.[1] This power in
ordinary matters we call knack, tact, cleverness; in more important
affairs, insight, discernment. In part it is instinctive or inborn; but it
also represents the funded outcome of long familiarity with like operations
in the past. Possession of this ability to seize what is evidential or
significant and to let the rest go is the mark of the expert, the
connoisseur, the judge, in any matter.
  Intuitive judgment
  Mill cites the following case, which is worth noting as an instance of the
extreme delicacy and accuracy to which may be developed this power of
sizing up the significant factors of a situation. "A Scotch manufacturer
procured from England, at a high rate of wages, a working dyer, famous for
producing very fine colors, with the view of teaching to his other workmen
the same
[pic]
(105) skill. The workman came; but his method of proportioning the
ingredients, in which lay the secret of the effects he produced, was by
taking them up in handfuls, while the common method was to weigh them. The
manufacturer sought to make him turn his handling system into an equivalent
weighing system, that the general principles of his peculiar mode of
proceeding might be ascertained. This, however, the man found himself quite
unable to do, and could therefore impart his own skill to nobody. He had,
from individual cases of his own experience, established a connection in
his mind between fine effects of color and tactual perceptions in handling
his dyeing materials; and from these perceptions he could, in any
particular case, infer the means to be employed and the effects which would
be produced." Long brooding over conditions, intimate contact associated
with keen interest, thorough absorption in a multiplicity of allied
experiences, tend to bring about those judgments which we then call
intuitive; but they are true judgments because they are based on
intelligent selection and estimation, with the solution of a problem as the
controlling standard. Possession of this capacity makes the difference
between the artist and the intellectual bungler.
  Such is judging ability, in its completest form, as to the data of the
decision to be reached. But in any case there is a certain feeling along
for the way to be followed; a constant tentative picking out of certain
qualities to see what emphasis upon them would lead to ; a willingness to
hold final selection in suspense; and to reject the factors entirely or
relegate them to a different Position in the evidential scheme if other
features yield more solvent suggestions. Alertness, flexibility, curios-
[pic]
(106)-ity are the essentials; dogmatism, rigidity, prejudice, caprice,
arising from routine, passion, and flippancy are fatal.
  (b) To decide an issue, the appropriate principles must also be selected
  (b) This selection of data is, of course, for the sake of controlling the
development and elaboration of the suggested meaning in the light of which
they are to be interpreted (compare p. 76). An evolution of conceptions
thus goes on simultaneously with the determination of the facts; one
possible meaning after another is held before the mind, considered in
relation to the data to which it is applied, is developed into its more
detailed bearings upon the data, is dropped or tentatively accepted and
used. We do not approach any problem with a wholly naive or virgin mind; we
approach it with certain acquired habitual modes of understanding, with a
certain store of previously evolved meanings, or at least of experiences
from which meanings may be educed. If the circumstances are such that a
habitual response is called directly into play, there is an immediate grasp
of meaning. If the habit is checked, and inhibited from easy application, a
possible meaning for the facts in question presents itself. No hard and
fast rules decide whether a meaning suggested is the right and proper
meaning to follow up. The individual's own good (or bad) judgment is the
guide. There is no label on any given idea or principle which says
automatically, "Use me in this situation " ― as the magic cakes of Alice in
Wonderland were inscribed " Eat me." The thinker has to decide, to choose;
and there is always a risk, so that the prudent thinker selects warily,
subject, that is, to confirmation or frustration by later events. If one is
not able to estimate wisely what is relevant to the interpretation of a
given perplexing or doubtful issue, it avails
[pic]
(107) little that arduous learning has built up a large stock of concepts.
For learning is not wisdom ; information does not guarantee good judgment.
Memory may provide an antiseptic refrigerator in which to store a stock of
meanings for future use, but judgment selects and adopts the one used in a
given emergency -and without an emergency (some crisis, slight or great)
there is no call for judgment. No conception, even if it is carefully and
firmly established in the abstract, can at first safely be more than a
candidate for the office of interpreter. Only greater success than that of
its rivals in clarifying dark spots, untying hard knots, reconciling
discrepancies, can elect it or prove it a valid idea for the given
situation.
  Judging terminates in a decision or statement
  3. The judgment when formed is a decision; it closes (or concludes) the
question at issue. This determination not only settles that particular
case, but it helps fix a rule or method for deciding similar matters in the
future; as the sentence of the judge on the bench both terminates that
dispute and also forms a precedent for future decisions. If the
interpretation settled upon is not controverted by subsequent events, a
presumption is built up in favor of similar interpretation in other cases
where the features are not so obviously unlike as to make it inappropriate.
In this way, principles of judging are gradually built up; a certain manner
of interpretation gets weight, authority. In short, meanings get
standardized, they become logical concepts (see below, p. 118).
                                          2 . The Origin and Nature of Ideas
  Ideas are conjectures employed in judging
  This brings us to the question of ideas in relation to judgments.[2]
Something in an obscure situation sug-
[pic]
(108)-gests something else as its meaning. If this meaning is at once
accepted, there is no reflective thinking, no genuine judging. Thought is
cut short uncritically; dogmatic belief, with all its attending risks,
takes place. But if the meaning suggested is held in suspense, pending
examination and inquiry, there is true judgment. We stop and think, we de-
fer conclusion in order to in-fer more thoroughly. In this process of being
only conditionally accepted, accepted only for examination, meanings become
ideas. That is to say, an idea is a meaning that is tentatively
entertained, formed, and used with reference to its fitness to decide a
perplexing situation, ― a meaning used as a toot of judgment.
  Or tools of interpretation
  Let us recur to our instance of a blur in motion appearing at a distance.
We wonder what the thing is, i.e. what the blur means. A man waving his
arms, a friend beckoning to us, are suggested as possibilities. To accept
at once either alternative is to arrest judgment. But if we treat what is
suggested as only a suggestion, a supposition, a possibility, it becomes an
idea, having the following traits: (a) As merely a suggestion, it is a
conjecture, a guess, which in cases of greater dignity we call a hypothesis
or a theory. That is to say, it is a possible but as yet doubtful mode of
interpretation. (b) Even though doubtful, it has an office to perform;
namely, that of directing inquiry and examination. If this blur means a
friend beckoning, then careful observation should show certain other
traits. If it is a man driving unruly cattle, certain other traits should
be found. Let us look and see if these traits are found. Taken merely as a
doubt, an idea would paralyze inquiry. Taken merely as a certainty, it
would arrest
[pic]
(109) inquiry. Taken as a doubtful possibility, it affords a standpoint, a
platform, a method of inquiry.
  Pseudo-ideas
  Ideas are not then genuine ideas unless they are tools in a reflective
examination which tends to solve a problem. Suppose it is a question of
having the pupil grasp the idea of the sphericity of the earth. This is
different from teaching him its sphericity as a fact. He may be shown (or
reminded of) a ball or a globe, and be told that the earth is round like
those things; he may then be made to repeat that statement day after day
till the shape of the earth and the shape of the ball are welded together
in his mind. But he has not thereby acquired any idea of the earth's
sphericity ; at most, he has had a certain image of a sphere and has
finally managed to image the earth after the analogy of his ball image. To
grasp sphericity as an idea, the pupil must first have realized certain
perplexities or confusing features in observed facts and have had the idea
of spherical shape suggested to him as a possible way of accounting for the
phenomena in question. Only by use as a method of interpreting data so as
to give them fuller meaning does sphericity become a genuine idea. There
may be a vivid image and no idea; or there may be a fleeting, obscure image
and yet an idea, if that image performs the function of instigating and
directing the observation and relation of facts.
  Ideas furnish the only alternative to "hit or miss" methods
  Logical ideas are like keys which are shaping with reference to opening a
lock. Pike, separated by a glass partition from the fish upon which they
ordinarily prey, will -so it is said ― butt their heads against the gl 'ass
until it is literally beaten into them that they cannot get at their food.
Animals learn (when they learn at all) by a " cut and try " method; by
doing at random
[pic]
(110) first one thing and another thing and then preserving the things that
happen to succeed. Action directed consciously by ideas -by suggested
meanings accepted for the sake of experimenting with them -is the sole
alternative both to bull-headed stupidity and to learning bought from that
dear teacher ― chance experience.
  They are methods of indirect attack
  It is significant that many words for intelligence suggest the idea of
circuitous, evasive activity ― often with a sort of intimation of even
moral obliquity. The bluff, hearty man goes straight (and stupidly, it is
implied) at some work. The intelligent man is cunning, shrewd (crooked),
wily, subtle, crafty, artful, designing -the idea of indirection is
involved.[3] An idea is a method of evading, circumventing, or surmounting
through reflection obstacles that otherwise would have to be attacked by
brute force. But ideas may lose their intellectual quality as they are
habitually used. When a child was first learning to recognize, in some
hesitating suspense, cats, dogs, houses, marbles, trees, shoes, and other
objects, ideas ― conscious and tentative meanings -intervened as methods of
identification. Now, as a rule, the thing and the meaning are so completely
fused that there is no judgment and no idea proper, but only automatic
recognition. On the other hand, things that are, as a rule, directly
apprehended and familiar become subjects of judgment when they present
themselves in unusual contexts: as forms, distances, sizes, positions when
we attempt to draw them; triangle, squares, and circles when they turn up,
not in connection with familiar toys, implements, and utensils, but as
problems in geometry.
[pic]
                                                 ? 3. Analysis and Synthesis
  Judging clears up things: analysis
  Through judging confused data are cleared up, and seemingly incoherent and
disconnected facts brought together. Things may have a peculiar feeling for
us, they may make a certain indescribable impression upon us; the thing may
feel round (that is, present a quality which we afterwards define as
round), an act may seem rude (or what we afterwards classify as rude), and
yet this quality may be lost, absorbed, blended in the total value of the
situation. Only as we need to use just that aspect of the original
situation as a tool of grasping something perplexing or obscure in another
situation, do we abstract or detach the quality so that it becomes.
individualized. Only because we need to characterize the shape of some new
object or the moral quality of some new act, does the element of roundness
or rudeness in the old experience detach itself, and stand out as a
distinctive feature. If the element thus selected clears up what is
otherwise obscure in the new experience, if it settles what is uncertain,
it thereby itself gains in positiveness and definiteness of meaning. This
point will meet us again in the following chapter; here we shall speak of
the matter only as it bears upon the questions of analysis and synthesis.
  Mental analysis is not like physical division
  Even when it is definitely stated that intellectual and physical analyses
are different sorts of operations, intellectual analysis is often treated
after the analogy of physical; as if it were the breaking up of a whole
into all its cQn3tituent parts in the mind instead of in space. As nobody
can possibly tell what breaking a whole into its parts in the mind means,
this conception leads to the further notion that logical analysis is a mere
enumeration and listing of all conceivable qualities and relations.
[pic]
  Misapprehension of analysis in education
  (112) The influence upon education of this conception has been very
great.[4] Every subject in the curriculum has passed through-or still
remains in-what may be called the phase of anatomical or morphological
method: the stage in which understanding the subject is thought to consist
of multiplying distinctions of quality, form, relation, and so on, and
attaching some name to each distinguished element. In normal growth,
specific properties are emphasized and so individualized only when they
serve to clear up a present difficulty. Only as they are involved in
judging some specific situation is there any motive or use for analyses,
ie. for emphasis upon some element or relation as peculiarly significant.
  Effects of premature formulation
  The same putting the cart before the horse, the product before the
process, is found in that overconscious formulation of methods of procedure
so current in elementary instruction. (See p. 60.) The method that is
employed in discovery, in reflective inquiry, cannot possibly be identified
with the method that emerges after the discovery is made. In the genuine
operation of inference, the mind is in the attitude of search, of hunting,
of projection, of trying this and that; when the conclusion is reached, the
search is at an end. The Greeks used to discuss: " How is learning (or
inquiry) possible? For either we know already what we are after, and then
we do not learn or inquire; or we do not know, and then we cannot inquire,
for we do not know what to look for." The dilemma is at least suggestive,
for it points to the true alternative: the use in inquiry of doubt, of
tentative suggestion, of experimen-
[pic]
(113)-tation. After we have reached the conclusion, a reconsideration of
the steps of the process to see what is helpful, what is harmful, what is
merely useless, will assist in dealing more promptly and efficaciously with
analogous problems in the future. In this way, more or less explicit method
is gradually built up. (Compare the earlier discussion on p. 62 Of the
psychological and the logical.)
  Method comes before its formulation
  It is, however, a common assumption that unless the pupil from the outset
consciously recognizes and explicitly states the method logically implied
in the result he is to reach, he will have no method, and his mind will
work confusedly or anarchically; while if he accompanies his performance
with conscious statement of some form of procedure (outline, topical
analysis, list of headings and subheadings, uniform formula) his mind is
safeguarded and strengthened. As a matter of fact, the development of an
unconscious logical attitude and habit must come first. A conscious setting
forth of the method logically adapted for reaching an end is possible only
after the result has first been reached by more unconscious and tentative
methods, while it is valuable only when a review of the method that
achieved success in a given case will throw light upon a new, similar case.
The ability to fasten upon and single out (abstract, analyze) those
features of one experience which are logically best is hindered by
premature insistence upon their explicit formulation. It is repeated use
that gives a method definiteness; and given this definiteness,
precipitation into formulated statement should follow naturally. But
because teachers find that the things which they themselves best understand
are marked off and defined in clear-cut ways, our schoolrooms are pervaded
[pic]
(114) with the superstition that children are to begin with already
crystallized formulae of method.
  Judgment reveals the bearing or significance of facts: synthesis
  As analysis is conceived to be a sort of picking to pieces, so synthesis
is thought to be a sort of physical piecing together; and so imagined, it
also becomes a mystery. In fact, synthesis takes place wherever we grasp
the bearing of facts on a conclusion, or of a principle on facts. As
analysis is emphasis, so synthesis is placing; the one causes the
emphasized fact or property to stand out as significant; the other gives
what is selected its context, or its connection with what is signified.
Every judgment is analytic in so far as it involves discernment,
discrimination, marking off the trivial from the important, the irrelevant
from what points to a conclusion; and it is synthetic in so far as it
leaves the mind with an inclusive situation within which the selected facts
are placed.
  Analysis and synthesis are correlative
  Educational methods that pride themselves on being exclusively analytic or
exclusively synthetic are therefore (so far as they carry out their boasts)
incompatible with normal operations of judgment. Discussions have taken
place, for example, as to whether the teaching of geography should be
analytic or synthetic. The synthetic method is supposed to begin with the
partial, limited portion of the earth's surface already familiar to the
pupil, and then gradually piece on adjacent regions (the county, the
country, the continent, and so on) till an idea of the entire globe is
reached, or of the solar system that includes the globe, The analytic
method is supposed to begin with the physical whole, the solar system or
globe, and to work down through its constituent portions till the immediate
environment is reached. The underlying conceptions are of physical wholes
and physical
[pic]
(115) parts. As matter of fact, we cannot assume that the portion of the
earth already familiar to the child is such a definite object, mentally,
that he can at once begin with it; his knowledge of it is misty and vague
as well as incomplete. Accordingly, mental progress will involve analysis
of it ― emphasis of the features that are significant, so that they will
stand out clearly. Moreover, his own locality is not sharply marked off,
neatly bounded, and measured. His experience of it is already an experience
that involves sun, moon, and stars as parts of the scene he surveys ; it
involves a changing horizon line as he moves about; that is, even his more
limited and local experience involves far-reaching factors that take his
imagination clear beyond his own street and village. Connection,
relationship with a larger whole, is already involved. But his recognition
of these relations is inadequate, vague, incorrect. He needs to utilize the
features of the local environment which are understood to help clarify and
enlarge his conceptions of the larger geographical scene to which they
belong. At the same time, not till he has grasped the larger scene will
many of even the commonest features of his environment become intelligible.
Analysis leads to synthesis; while synthesis perfects analysis. As the
pupil grows in comprehension of the vast complicated earth in its setting
in space, he also sees more definitely the meaning of the familiar local
details. This intimate interaction between selective emphasis and
interpretation of what is selected is found wherever reflection proceeds
normally. Hence the folly of trying to set analysis and synthesis over
against each other.
                                                                       Notes
     1. Compare what was said about analysis.
     2. The term idea is also used popularly to denote (a) a mere fancy, (b)
        an accepted belief, and also (c) judgment itself. But logically it
        denotes a certain factor in judgment, as explained in the text.
     3. See Ward, Psychic Factors of Civilization, p. 153.
     4. Thus arise all those falsely analytic methods in geography, reading,
        writing, drawing, botany, arithmetic, which we have already
        considered in another connection. (See p. 59.)
                        Chapter 9: Meaning: or Conceptions and Understanding
                                   ? I. The Place of Meanings in Mental Life
Meaning is central
  As in our discussion of judgment we were making more explicit what is
involved in inference, so in the discussion of meaning we are only
recurring to the central function of all reflection. For one thing to mean,
signify, betoken, indicate, or point to, another we saw at the outset to be
the essential mark of thinking (see p. 8). To find out what facts, just as
they stand, mean, is the object of all discovery; to find out what facts
will carry out, substantiate, support a given meaning, is the object of all
testing. When an inference reaches a satisfactory conclusion, we attain a
goal of meaning. The act of judging involves both the growth and the
application of meanings. In short, in this chapter we are not introducing a
new topic; we are only coming to closer quarters with what hitherto has
been constantly assumed. In the first section, we shall consider the
equivalence of meaning and understanding, and the two types of
understanding, direct and indirect.
1. MEANING AND UNDERSTANDING
  To understand is to grasp meaning
  If a person comes suddenly into your room and calls out " Paper," various
alternatives are possible. If you do not understand the English language,
there is simply a noise which may or may not act as a physical stimulus
[pic]
(117) and irritant. But the noise is not an intellectual object; it does
not have intellectual value. (Compare above, p. 15.) To say that you do not
understand it and that it has no meaning are equivalents. If the cry is the
usual accompaniment of the delivery of the morning paper, the sound will
have meaning, intellectual content; you will understand it. Or if you are
eagerly awaiting the receipt of some important document, you may assume
that the cry means an announcement of its arrival. If (in the third place)
you understand the English language, but no context suggests itself from
your habits and expectations, the word has meaning, but not the whole
event. You are then perplexed and incited to think out, to hunt for, some
explanation of the apparently meaningless occurrence. If you find something
that accounts for the performance, it gets meaning; you come to understand
it. As intelligent beings, we presume the existence of meaning, and its
absence is an anomaly. Hence, if it should turn out that the person merely
meant to inform you that there was a scrap of paper on the sidewalk, or
that paper existed somewhere in the universe, you would think him crazy or
yourself the victim of a poor joke. To grasp a meaning, to understand, to
identify a thing in a situation in which it is important, are thus
equivalent terms; they express the nerves of our intellectual life. Without
them ,there is (a) lack of intellectual content, or (b) intellectual
confusion and perplexity, or else (c) intellectual perversion ― nonsense,
insanity.
  Knowledge and meaning
  All knowledge, all science, thus aims to grasp the meaning of objects and
events, and this process always consists in taking them out of their
apparent brute isolation as events, and finding them to be parts of some
[pic]
(118)larger whole suggested by them, which, in turn, accounts for,
explains, interprets them; i.e. renders them significant. (Compare above,
P. 75.) Suppose that a stone with peculiar markings has been found. What do
these scratches mean ? So far as the object forces the raising of this
question, it is not understood; while so far as the color and form that we
see mean to us a stone, the object is understood. It is such peculiar
combinations of the understood and the nonunderstood that provoke thought.
If at the end of the inquiry, the markings are decided to mean glacial
scratches, obscure and perplexing traits have been translated into meanings
already understood: namely, the moving and grinding power of large bodies
of ice and the friction thus induced of one rock upon another. Something
already understood in one situation has been transferred and applied to
what is strange and perplexing in another, and thereby the latter has
become plain and familiar, i.e. understood. This summary illustration
discloses that our power to think effectively depends upon possession of a
capital fund of meanings which may be applied when desired. (Compare what
was said about deduction, p. 94.)
II. DIRECT AND INDIRECT UNDERSTANDING
  Direct and circuitous understanding
  In the above illustrations two types of grasping of meaning are
exemplified. When the English language is understood, the person grasps at
once the meaning of cc paper." He may not, however, see any meaning or
sense in the performance as a whole. Similarly, the person identifies the
object on sight as a stone; there is no secret, no mystery, no perplexity
about that. But he does not understand the markings on it. They have
[pic]
(119) some meaning, but what is it? In one case, owing to familiar
acquaintance, the thing and its meaning, up to a certain point, are one. In
the other, the thing and its meaning are, temporarily at least, sundered,
and meaning has to be sought in order to understand the thing. In one case
understanding is direct, prompt, immediate; in the other, it is roundabout
and delayed.
  Interaction of the two types
  Most languages have two sets of words to express these two modes of
understanding; one for the direct taking in or grasp of meaning, the other
for its circuitous apprehension, thus: yvCovat and 618evat in Greek;
noscere and scire in Latin; kennen and wissen in German ; connaitre and
savoir in French; while in English to be acquainted with and to know of or
about have been suggested as equivalents.[1] Now our intellectual life
consists of a peculiar interaction between these two types of
understanding. All judgment, all reflective inference, presupposes some
lack of understanding, a partial absence of meaning. We reflect in order
that we may get hold of the full and adequate significance of what happens.
Nevertheless, something must be already understood, the mind must be in
possession of some meaning which it has mastered, or else thinking is
impossible. We think in order to grasp meaning, but none the less every
extension of knowledge makes us aware of blind and opaque spots, where with
less knowledge all had seemed obvious and natural. A scientist brought into
a new district will find many things that he does not understand, where the
native savage or
[pic]
(120) rustic will be wholly oblivious to any meanings beyond those directly
apparent. Some Indians brought to a large city remained stolid at the sight
of mechanical wonders of bridge, trolley, and telephone, but were held
spellbound by the sight of workmen climbing poles to repair wires. Increase
of the store of meanings makes us conscious of new problems, while only
through translation of the new perplexities into what is already familiar
and plain do we understand or solve these problems. This is the constant
spiral movement of knowledge.
  Intellectual progress a rhythm
  Our progress in genuine knowledge always consists in part in the discovery
of something not understood in what had previously been taken for granted
as plain, obvious, -matter-of-course, and in part in the use of meanings
that are directly grasped without question, as instruments for getting hold
of obscure, doubtful, and perplexing meanings. No object is so familiar, so
obvious, so commonplace that it may not unexpectedly present, in a novel
situation, some problem, and thus arouse reflection in order to understand
it. No object or principle is so strange, peculiar, or remote that it may
not be dwelt upon till its meaning becomes familiar-taken in on sight
without reflection. We may come to see, perceive, recognize, grasp, seize,
lay hold of principles, laws, abstract truths -ie. to understand their
meaning in very immediate fashion. Our intellectual progress consists, as
has been said, in a rhythm of direct understanding ― technically called
apprehension ― with indirect, mediated understanding ― technically called
comprehension.
                                      ? 2. The Process of Acquiring Meanings
  Familiarity
  The first problem that comes up in connection with direct understanding is
how a store of directly apprehensible meanings is built up. How do we learn
to view things on sight as significant members of a situation, or as
having, as a matter of course, specific meanings ? Our chief difficulty in
answering this question lies in the thoroughness with which the lesson of
familiar things has been learnt. Thought can more easily traverse an
unexplored region than it can undo what has been so thoroughly done as to
be ingrained in unconscious habit. We apprehend chairs, tables, books,
trees, horses, clouds, stars, rain, so promptly and directly that it is
hard to realize that as meanings they had once to be acquired, ― the
meanings are now so much parts of the things themselves.
  Confusion is prior to familiarity
  In an often quoted passage, Mr. James has said: "The baby, assailed by
eyes, ears, nose, skin, and entrails at once, feels it all as one great
blooming, buzzing confusion."[2] Mr. James is speaking of a baby's world
taken as a whole; the description, however, is equally applicable to the
way any new thing strikes an adult, so far as the thing is really new and
strange. To the traditional " cat in a strange garret," everything is
blurred and confused; the wonted marks that label things so as to separate
them from one another are lacking. Foreign languages that we do not
understand always seem jabberings, babblings, in which it is impossible to
fix a definite, clear-cut, individualized group of sounds. The countryman
in the crowded city street, the landlubber at sea, the ignoramus in sport
at a contest between experts in a complicated game, are further instances.
Put an unexperienced man in a factory, and at first the work seems to him a
meaningless medley. All strangers of another race proverbially look alike
to the visiting
[pic]
(122) foreigner. Only gross differences of size or color are perceived by
an outsider in a flock of sheep, each of which is perfectly individualized
to the shepherd. A diffusive blur and an indiscriminately shifting suction
characterize what we do not understand. The problem of the acquisition of
meaning by things, or (stated in another way) of forming habits of simple
apprehension, is thus the problem of introducing (i) definiteness and
distinction and (ii) consistency or stability of meaning into what is
otherwise vague and wavering.
  Practical responses clarify confusion
  The acquisition of definiteness and of coherency (or constancy) of
meanings is derived primarily from practical activities. By rolling an
object, the child makes its roundness appreciable; by bouncing it, he
singles out its elasticity; by throwing it, be makes weight its conspicuous
distinctive factor. Not through the senses, but by means of the reaction,
the responsive adjustment, is the impression made distinctive, and given a
character marked off from other qualities that call out unlike reactions.
Children, for example, are usually quite slow in apprehending differences
of color. Differences from the standpoint of the adult so glaring that it
is impossible not to note them are recognized and recalled with great
difficulty. Doubtless they do not all feel alike, but there is no
intellectual recognition of what makes the difference. The redness or
greenness or blueness of the object does not tend to call out a reaction
that is sufficiently peculiar to give prominence or distinction to the
color trait. Gradually, however, certain characteristic habitual responses
associate themselves with certain things; the white becomes the sign, say,
of milk and sugar, to which the child reacts favorably; blue becomes the
sign of a dress that the child likes to wear, and so on; and the
[pic]
(123) distinctive reactions tend to single out color qualities from other
things in which they had been submerged.
  Take another example. We have little difficulty in distinguishing from one
another rakes, hoes, plows and harrows, shovels and spades. Each has its
own associated characteristic use and function. We may have, however, great
difficulty in recalling the difference between serrate and dentate, ovoid
and obovoid, in the shapes and edges of leaves, or between acids in ic and
in ous. There is some difference; but just what? Or, we know what the
difference is; but which is which? Variations in form, size, color, and
arrangement of parts have much less to do, and the uses, purposes, and
functions of things and of their parts much more to do, with distinctness
of character and meaning than we should be likely to think. What misleads
us is the fact that the qualities of form, size, color, and so on, are now
so distinct that we fail to see that the problem is precisely to account
for the way in which they originally obtained their definiteness and
conspicuousness. So far as we sit passive before objects, they are not
distinguished out of a vague blur which swallows them all. Differences in
the pitch and intensity of sounds leave behind a different feeling, but
until we assume different attitudes toward them, or do something special in
reference to them, their vague difference cannot be intellectually gripped
and retained.
  Children's drawings illustrate domination by value
  Children's drawings afford a further exemplification Of the same
principle, Perspective does not exist, for the child's interest is not in
pictorial representation, but in the things represented; and while
perspective is essential to the former, it is no part of the characteristic
uses and values of the things themselves. The house
[pic]
(124) is drawn with transparent walls, because the rooms, chairs, beds,
people inside, are the important things in the house-meaning; smoke always
comes out of the chimney ― otherwise, why have a chimney at all? At
Christmas time, the stockings may be drawn almost as large as the house or
even so large that they have to be put outside of it: ― in any case, it is
the scale of values in use that furnishes the scale for their qualities,
the pictures being diagrammatic reminders of these values, not impartial
records of physical and sensory qualities. One of the chief difficulties
felt by most persons in learning the art of pictorial representation is
that habitual uses and results of use have become so intimately read into
the character of things that it is practically impossible to shut them out
at will.
  As do sounds used as language signs
  The acquiring of meaning by sounds, in virtue of which they become words,
is perhaps the most striking illustration that can be found of the way in
which mere sensory stimuli acquire definiteness and constancy of meaning
and are thereby themselves defined and interconnected for purposes of
recognition. Language is a specially good example because there are
hundreds or even thousands of words in which meaning is now so thoroughly
consolidated with physical qualities as to be directly apprehended, while
in the case of words it is easier to recognize that this connection has
been gradually and laboriously acquired than in the case of physical
objects such as chairs, tables, buttons, trees, stones, hills, flowers, and
so on, where it seems as if the union of intellectual character and meaning
with the physical fact were aboriginal, and thrust upon us passively rather
than acquired through active explorations. And in the case of the meaning
of words, we see readily that it is by making
[pic]
(125) sounds and noting the results which follow, by listening to the
sounds of others and watching the activities which accompany them, that a
given sound finally becomes the stable bearer of a meaning.
  Summary
  Familiar acquaintance with meanings thus signifies that we have acquired
in the presence of objects definite attitudes of response which lead us,
without reflection, to anticipate certain possible consequences. The
definiteness of the expectation defines the meaning or takes it out of the
vague and pulpy; its habitual, recurrent character gives the meaning
constancy, stability, consistency, or takes it out of the fluctuating and
wavering.
                                                ? 3. Conceptions and Meaning
  A conception is a definite meaning
  The word meaning is a familiar everyday term; the words conception,
notion, are both popular and technical terms. Strictly speaking, they
involve, however, nothing new; any meaning sufficiently individualized to
be directly grasped and readily used, and thus fixed by a word, is a
conception or notion. Linguistically, every common noun is the carrier of a
meaning, while proper nouns and common nouns with the word this or that
prefixed, refer to the things in which the meanings are exemplified. That
thinking both employs and expands notions, conceptions, is then simply
saying that in inference and judgment we use meanings, and that this use
also corrects and widens them.
  which is standardized
  Various persons talk about an object not physically present, and yet all
get the same material of belief . The same person in different moments
often refers to the same object or kind of objects. The sense experience,
the physical conditions, the psychological conditions, vary, but the same
meaning is conserved. If pounds
[pic]
(126) arbitrarily changed their weight, and foot rules their length, while
we were using them, obviously we could not weigh nor measure. This would be
our intellectual position if meanings could not be maintained with a
certain stability and constancy through a variety of physical and personal
changes.
  By it we identify the unknown
  and supplement the sensibly present
  To insist upon the fundamental importance of conceptions would,
accordingly, only repeat what has been said. We shall merely summarize,
saying that conceptions, or standard meanings, are instruments (i) of
identification, (ii) of supplementation, and (iii) of placing in a system.
Suppose a little speck of light hitherto unseen is detected in the heavens.
Unless there is a store of meanings to fall back upon as tools of inquiry
and reasoning, that speck of light will remain just what it is to the
senses ― a mere speck of light. For all that it leads to, it might as well
be a mere irritation of the optic nerve Given the stock of meanings
acquired in prior experience, this speck of light is mentally attacked by
means of appropriate concepts. Does it indicate asteroid, or comet, or a
new-forming sun, or a nebula resulting from some cosmic collision or
disintegration ? Each of these conceptions has its own specific and
differentiating characters, which are then sought for by minute and
persistent inquiry. As a result, then, the speck is identified, we will
say, as a comet. Through a standard meaning, it gets identity and stability
of character. Supplementation then takes place. All the known qualities of
comets are read into this particular thing, even though they have not been
as yet observed. All that the astronomers of the past have learned about
the paths and structure of comets becomes available capital with which to
interpret the speck
[pic]
  and also systematize things
  (127) of light. Finally, this comet-meaning is itself not isolated; it is
a related portion of the whole system of astronomic knowledge. Suns,
planets, satellites, nebulae, comets, meteors, star dust-all these
conceptions have a certain mutuality of reference and interaction, and when
the speck of light is identified as meaning a comet, it is at once adopted
as a full member in this vast kingdom of beliefs.
  Importance of system to knowledge
  Darwin, in an autobiographical sketch, says that when a youth he told the
geologist, Sidgwick, of finding a tropical shell in a certain gravel pit.
Thereupon Sidgwick said it must have been thrown there by some person,
adding: " But if it were really embedded there, it would be the greatest
misfortune to geology, because it would overthrow all that we know about
the superficial deposits of the Midland Counties " ― since they were
glacial. And then Darwin adds: " I was then utterly astonished at Sidgwick
not being delighted at so wonderful a fact as a tropical shell being found
near the surface in the middle of England. Nothing before had made me
thoroughly realize that science consists in grouping facts so that general
laws or conclusions may be drawn from them." This instance (which might, of
course, be duplicated from any branch of science) indicates how scientific
notions make explicit the systematizing tendency involved in all use of
concepts.
                                               ? 4. What Conceptions are Not
  The idea that a conception is a meaning that supplies a standard rule for
the identification and placing of particulars may be contrasted with some
current misapprehensions of its nature.
  I. Conceptions are not derived from a multitude of
[pic]
  A concept is not a bare residue
  (128) different definite objects by leaving out the qualities in which
they differ and retaining those in which they agree. The origin of concepts
is sometimes described to be as if a child began with a lot of different
particular things, say particular dogs; his own Fido, his neighbor's Carlo,
his cousin's Tray. Having all these different objects before him, he
analyzes them into a lot of different qualities, say (a) color, (b) size,
(c) shape, (d) number of legs, (e) quantity and quality of hair, (f)
digestive organs, and so on; and then strikes out all the unlike qualities
(such as color, size, shape, hair), retaining traits such as quadruped and
domesticated, which they all have in general.
  but an active attitude
  As a matter of fact, the child begins with whatever significance he has
got out of the one dog he has seen, heard, and handled. He has found that
he can carry over from one experience of this object to subsequent
experience certain expectations of certain characteristic modes of behavior
― may expect these even before they show themselves. He tends to assume
this attitude of anticipation whenever any clue or stimulus presents
itself; whenever the object gives him any excuse for it. Thus he might call
cats little dogs, or horses big dogs. But finding that other expected
traits and modes of behavior are not fulfilled, he is forced to throw out
certain traits from the dog-meaning, while by contrast (see p. 90) certain
other traits are selected and emphasized. As he further applies the meaning
to other dogs, the dog-meaning gets still further defined and refined. He
does not begin with a lot of ready-made objects from which he extracts a
common meaning ; he tries to apply to every new experience whatever from
his old experience will help him understand it,
[pic]
(129) and as this process of constant assumption and experimentation is
fulfilled and refuted by results, his conceptions get body and clearness.
  It is general because of its application
  2. Similarly, conceptions are general because of their I use and
application, not because of their ingredients. The view of the origin of
conception in an impossible sort of analysis has as its counterpart the
idea that the conception is made up out of all the like elements that
remain after dissection of a number of individuals. Not so; the moment a
meaning is gained, it is a working tool of further apprehensions, an
instrument of understanding other things. Thereby the meaning is extended
to cover them. Generality resides in application to the comprehension of
new cases, not in constituent parts. A collection of traits left as the
common residuum, the caput mortuum, of a million objects, would be merely a
collection, an inventory or aggregate, not a general idea ; a striking
trait emphasized in any one experience which then served to help understand
some one other experience, would become, in virtue of that service of
application, in so far general. Synthesis is not a matter of mechanical
addition, but of application of something discovered in one case to bring
other cases into line.
                                ? 5. Definition and Organization of Meanings
  Definiteness versus vagueness
  A being that cannot understand at all is at least protected from mis-
understandings. But beings that get knowledge by means of inferring and
interpreting, by judging what things signify in relation to one another,
are constantly exposed to the danger of mis-apprehension, mis-
understanding, mis-taking -taking a thing amiss. A constant source of
misunderstanding and mistake is indefiniteness of meaning. Through
vagueness of
[pic]
  In the abstract meaning is intension
   
  In its application it is extension
  (130) meaning we misunderstand other people, things, and ourselves ;
through its ambiguity we distort and pervert conscious distortion of
meaning may be enjoyed as nonsense; erroneous meanings, if clear-cut, may
be followed up and got rid of. But vague meanings are too gelatinous to
offer matter for analysis, and too pulpy to afford support to other
beliefs. They evade testing and responsibility. Vagueness disguises the
unconscious mixing together of different meanings, and facilitates the
substitution of one meaning for another, and covers up the failure to have
any precise meaning at all. It is the aboriginal logical sin ―the source
from which flow most bad intellectual consequences. Totally to eliminate
indefiniteness is impossible; to reduce it in extent and in force requires
sincerity and vigor. To be clear or perspicuous a meaning must be detached,
single, self-contained, homogeneous as it were, throughout. The technical
name for any meaning which is thus individualized is intension. The process
of arriving at such units of meaning (and of stating them when reached) is
definition. The intension of the terms man, river, seed, honesty, capital,
supreme court, is the meaning that exclusively and characteristically
attaches to those terms. This meaning is set forth in the definitions of
those words. The test of the distinctness of a meaning is that it shall
successfully mark off a group of things that exemplify the meaning from
other groups, especially of those objects that convey nearly allied
meanings. The river-meaning (or character) must serve- to designate the
Rhone, the Rhine, the Mississippi, the Hudson, the Wabash, in spite of
their varieties of place, length, quality of water; and must be such as
-not to suggest ocean currents, ponds, or brooks. This use of a mean-
[pic]
(131)-ing to mark off and group together a variety of distinct existences
constitutes its extension.
  Definition and division
  As definition sets forth intension, so division (or the reverse process,
classification) expounds extension. Intension and extension, definition and
division, are clearly correlative; in language previously used, intension
is meaning as a principle of identifying particulars; extension is the
group of particulars identified and distinguished. Meaning, as extension,
would be wholly in the air or unreal, did it not point to some object or
group of objects; while objects would be as isolated and independent
intellectually as they seem to be spatially, were they not bound into
groups or classes on the basis of characteristic meanings which they
constantly suggest and exemplify. Taken together, definition and division
put us in possession of individualized or definite meanings and indicate to
what group of objects meanings refer. They typify the fixation and the
organization of meanings. In the degree in which the meanings of any set of
experiences are so cleared up as to serve as principles for grouping those
experiences in relation to one another, that set of particulars becomes a
science; i.e. definition and classification are the marks of a science, as
distinct from both unrelated heaps of miscellaneous information and from
the habits that introduce coherence into our experience without our being
aware of their operation.
  Definitions are of three types, denotative, expository, scientific. Of
these, the first and third are logically important, while the expository
type is socially and pedagogically important as an intervening step.
  We define by picking out
  I. Denotative. A blind man can never have an adequate understanding of the
meaning of color and red ;  a seeing person can acquire the knowledge only
by hav-
[pic]
(132) ing certain things designated in such a way as to fix attention upon
some of their qualities. This method of delimiting a meaning by calling out
a certain attitude toward objects may be called denotative or indicative.
It is required for all sense qualities -sounds, tastes, colors-and equally
for all emotional and moral qualities. The meanings of honesty, sympathy,
hatred, fear, must be grasped by having them presented in an individual's
first-hand experience. The reaction of educational reformers against
linguistic and bookish training has always taken the form of demanding
recourse to personal experience. However advanced the person is in
knowledge and in scientific training, understanding of a new subject, or a
new aspect of an old subject, must always be through these acts of
experiencing directly the existence or quality in question.
  and also by combining what is already more definite,
  2. Expository. Given a certain store of meanings which have been directly
or denotatively marked out, language becomes a resource by which
imaginative combinations and variations may be built up. A color may be
defined to one who has not experienced it as lying between green and blue;
a tiger may be defined (i.e. the idea of it made more definite) by
selecting some qualities from known members of the cat tribe and combining
them with qualities of size and weight derived from other objects.
Illustrations are of the nature of expository definitions; so are the
accounts of meanings given in a dictionary. By taking better-known meanings
and associating them, ― the attained store of meanings of the community in
which one resides is put at one's disposal. But in themselves these
definitions are secondhand and conventional; there is danger that instead
of inciting one to effort after personal experiences that
[pic]
(133) will exemplify and verify them, they will be accepted on authority as
substitutes.
  and by discovering method of production
  3. Scientific. Even popular definitions serve as rules for identifying and
classifying individuals, but the purpose of such identifications and
classifications is mainly practical and social, not intellectual. To
conceive the whale as a fish does not interfere with the success of
whalers, nor does it prevent recognition of a whale when seen, while to
conceive it not as fish but as mammal serves the practical end equally
well, and also furnishes a much more valuable principle for scientific
identification and classification. Popular definitions select certain
fairly obvious traits as keys to classification. Scientific definitions
select conditions of causation, production, and generation as their
characteristic material. The traits used by the popular definition do not
help us to understand why an object has its common meanings and qualities;
they simply state the fact that it does have them. Causal and genetic
definitions fix upon the way an object is constructed as the key to its
being a certain kind of object, and thereby explain why it has its class or
common traits.
  Contrast of causal and descriptive definitions
  If, for example, a layman of considerable practical experience were asked
what he meant or understood by metal, be would probably reply in terms of
the qualities useful (i) in recognizing any given metal and (ii) in the
arts. Smoothness, hardness, glossiness, and brilliancy, heavy weight for
its size, would probably be included in his definition, because such traits
enable us to identify specific things when we see and touch them; the
serviceable properties of capacity for being hammered and Pulled without
breaking, of being softened by heat and hardened by cold, of retaining the
shape and form
[pic]
  Science is the most perfect type of knowledge because it uses causal
definitions
  (134) given, of resistance to pressure and decay, would probably be
included ―whether or not such terms as malleable or fusible were used. Now
a scientific conception, instead of using, even with additions, traits of
this kind, determines meaning on a different basis. The present definition
of metal is about like this: Metal means any chemical element that enters
into combination with oxygen so as to form a base, i.e. a compound that
combines with an acid to form a salt. This scientific definition is
founded, not on directly perceived qualities nor on directly useful
properties, but on the way in which certain things are causally related to
other things; i.e. it denotes a relation. As chemical concepts become more
and more those of relationships of interaction in constituting other
substances, so physical concepts express more and more relations of
operation: mathematical, as expressing functions of dependence and order of
grouping; biological, relations of differentiation of descent, effected
through adjustment of various environments; and so on through the sphere of
the sciences. In short, our conceptions attain a maximum of definite
individuality and of generality (or applicability) in the degree to which
they show how things depend upon one another or influence one another,
instead of expressing the qualities that objects possess statically. The
ideal of a system of scientific conceptions is to attain continuity,
freedom, and flexibility of transition in passing from any fact and meaning
to any other; this demand is met in the degree in which we lay hold of the
dynamic ties that hold things together in a continuously changing process ―
a principle that states insight into mode of production or growth.
                                                                       Notes
     1. James, Principles of Psychology, Vol. 1, P. 221. To know and to know
        that are perhaps more precise equivalents; compare " I know him "
        and " I know that he has gone home." The former expresses a fact
        simply ; for the latter, evidence might be demanded and supplied.
     2. Principles of Psychology, VOL I p. 488.
                                  Chapter 10: Concrete and Abstract Thinking
False notions of concrete and abstract
  THE maxim enjoined upon teachers, " to proceed from the concrete to the
abstract," is perhaps familiar rather than comprehended. Few who read and
hear it gain a clear conception of the starting-point, the concrete; of the
nature of the goal, the abstract; and of the exact nature of the path to be
traversed in going from one to the other. At times the injunction is
positively misunderstood, being taken to mean that education should advance
from. things to thought ― as if any dealing with things in which thinking
is not involved could possibly be educative. So understood, the maxim
encourages mechanical routine or sensuous excitation at one end of the
educational scale ― the lower and academic and unapplied learning at the
upper end.
  Nominally, all dealing with things, even the child's, is immersed in
inferences; things are clothed by the suggestions they arouse, and are
significant as challenges to interpretation or as evidences to substantiate
a belief. Nothing could be more unnatural than instruction in things
without thought; in sense-perceptions without judgments based upon them.
And if the abstract to which we are to proceed denotes thought apart from
things, the goal recommended is formal and
[pic]
(136) empty, for effective thought always refers, more or less directly, to
things.
  Direct and indirect understanding again
  Yet the maxim has a meaning which, understood and supplemented, states the
line of development of logical capacity. What is this signification?
Concrete denotes a meaning definitely marked off from other meanings so
that it is readily apprehended by itself. When we hear the words, table,
chair, stove, coat, we do not have to reflect in order to grasp what is
meant. The terms convey meaning so directly that no effort at translating
is needed. The meanings of some terms and things, however, are grasped only
by first calling to mind more familiar things and then tracing out
connections between them and what we do not understand. Roughly speaking,
the former kind of meanings is concrete; the latter abstract.
  What is familiar is mentally concrete
  To one who is thoroughly at home in physics and chemistry, the notions of
atom and molecule are fairly concrete. They are constantly used without
involving any labor of thought in apprehending what they mean. But the
layman and the beginner in science have first to remind themselves of
things with which they already are well acquainted, and go through a
process of slow translation; the terms atom and molecule losing, moreover,
their hard-won meaning only too easily if familiar things, and the line of
transition from them to the strange, drop out of mind. The same difference
is illustrated by any technical terms: coefficient and exponent in algebra,
triangle and square in their geometric as distinct from their popular
meanings; capital and value as used in political economy, and so on.
  Practical things are familiar
  The difference as noted is purely relative to the intellectual progress of
an individual; what is abstract
[pic]
(137) at one period of growth is concrete at another; or even the contrary,
as one finds that things supposed to be thoroughly familiar involve strange
factors and unsolved problems. There is, nevertheless, a general line of
cleavage which, deciding upon the whole what things fall within the Emits
of familiar acquaintance and what without, marks off the concrete and the
abstract in a more permanent way. These limits are fixed mainly by the
demands of practical life. Things such as sticks and stones, meat and
potatoes, houses and trees, are such constant features of the environment
of which we have to take account in order to live, that their important
meanings are soon learnt, and indissolubly associated with objects. We are
acquainted with a thing (or it is familiar to us) when we have so much to
do with it that its strange and unexpected corners are rubbed off. The
necessities of social intercourse convey to adults a Eke concreteness upon
such terms as taxes, elections, wages, the law, and so on. Things the
meaning of which I personally do not take in directly, appliances of cook,
carpenter, or weaver, for example, are nevertheless unhesitatingly classed
as concrete, since they are so directly connected with our common social
life.
  The theoretical, or strictly intellectual, is abstract
  By contrast, the abstract is the theoretical, or that not intimately
associated with practical concerns. The abstract thinker (the man of pure
science as he is sometimes called) deliberately abstracts from application
in life; that is, he leaves practical uses out of account. This, however,
is a merely negative statement. What remains when connections with use and
application are excluded? Evidently only what has to do with knowing
considered as an end in itself. Many notions of science
[pic]
(138) are abstract, not only because they cannot be understood without a
long apprenticeship in the science (which is equally true of technical
matters in the arts), but also because the whole content of their meaning
has been framed for the sole purpose of facilitating further knowledge,
inquiry, and speculation. When thinking is used as a means to some end,
good, or value beyond itself, it is concrete; when it is employed simply as
a means to more thinking, it is abstract. To a theorist an idea is adequate
and self-contained just because it engages and rewards thought; to a
medical practitioner, an engineer, an artist, a merchant, a politician, it
is complete only when employed in the furthering of some interest in life ―
health, wealth, beauty, goodness, success, or what you will.
  Contempt for theory
  For the great majority of men under ordinary circumstances, the practical
exigencies of life are almost, if not quite, coercive. Their main business
is the proper conduct of their affairs. Whatever is of significance only as
affording scope for thinking is pallid and remote -almost artificial. Hence
the contempt felt by the practical and successful executive for the 11 mere
theorist"; hence his conviction that certain things may be all very well in
theory, but that they will not do in practice; in general, the depreciatory
way in which he uses the terms abstract, theoretical, and intellectual as
distinct from intelligent.
  But theory is highly practical
  This attitude is justified, of course, under certain conditions. But
depreciation of theory does not contain the whole truth, as common or
practical sense recognizes. There is such a thing, even from the
commonsense standpoint, as being "too practical," as being so intent upon
the immediately practical as not to see
[pic]
(139) beyond the end of one's nose or as to cut off the limb upon which one
is sitting. The question is one of limits, of degrees and adjustments,
rather than one of absolute separation. Truly practical men give their
minds free play about a subject without asking too closely at every point
for the advantage to be gained; exclusive preoccupation with matters of use
and application so narrows the horizon as in the long run to defeat itself.
It does not pay to tether one's thoughts to the post of use with too short
a rope. Power in action requires some largeness and imaginativeness of
vision. Men must at least have enough interest in thinking for the sake of
thinking to escape the limits of routine and custom. Interest in knowledge
for the sake of knowledge, in thinking for the sake of the free play of
thought, is necessary then to the emancipation of practical life to make it
rich and progressive.
  We may now recur to the pedagogic maxim of going from the concrete to the
abstract.
  Begin with the concrete means begin with practical manipulation
  I. Since the concrete denotes thinking applied to activities for the sake
of dealing effectively with the difficulties that present themselves
practically, " beginning with the concrete " signifies that we should at
the outset make much of doing; especially, make much in occupations that
are not of a routine and mechanical kind and hence require intelligent
selection and adaptation of means and materials. We do not " follow the
order of nature " when we multiply mere sensations or accumulate physical
objects. Instruction in number is not concrete merely because splints or
beans or dots are employed, while whenever the use and bearing of number
relations are clearly perceived, the number idea is concrete even if
figures alone are used. just what sort of
[pic]
(140) symbol it is best to use at a given time ― whether blocks, entirely a
matter of adjustment of lines, or figures ― is to the given case. If
physical things used in teaching 1 number or geography or anything else do
not leave the mind illuminated with recognition of a meaning beyond
themselves, the instruction that uses them is as abstract as that which
doles out ready-made definitions and rules; for it distracts attention from
ideas to mere physical excitations.
  Confusion of the concrete with the sensibly isolated
  The conception that we have only to put before the senses particular
physical objects in order to impress certain ideas upon the mind amounts
almost to a superstition. The introduction of object lessons and sense
training scored a distinct advance over the prior method of linguistic
symbols, and this advance tended to blind educators to the fact that only a
halfway step had been taken. Things and sensations develop the child,
indeed, but only because he uses them in mastering his body and in the
scheme of his activities. Appropriate continuous occupations or activities
involve the use of natural materials, tools, modes of energy, and do it in
a way that compels thinking as to what they mean, how they are related to
one another and to the realization of ends; while the mere isolated
presentation of things remains barren and dead. A few generations ago the
great obstacle in the way of reform of primary education was belief in the
almost magical efficacy of the symbols of language (including number) to
produce mental training; at present, belief in the efficacy of objects just
as objects, blocks the way. As frequently happens, the better is an enemy
of the best.
  Transfer of interest to
  2. The interest in results, in the successful carrying on of an activity,
should be gradually transferred to study
[pic]
  intellectional matters
  (141) of objects -their properties, consequences, structures, causes, and
effects. The adult when at work in his life calling is rarely free to
devote time or energy ― beyond the necessities of his immediate action ― to
the study of what he deals with. (Ante, P. 43.) The educative activities of
childhood should be so. arranged that direct interest in the activity and
its outcome create a demand for attention to matters that have a more and
more indirect and remote connection with the original activity. The direct
interest in carpentering or shop work should yield organically and
gradually an interest in geometric and mechanical problems. The interest in
cooking should grow into an interest in chemical experimentation and in the
physiology and hygiene of bodily growth. The making of pictures should pass
to an interest in the technique of representation and the aesthetics of
appreciation, and so on. This development is what the term go signifies in
the maxim "go from the concrete to the abstract "; it represents the
dynamic and truly educative factor of the process.
  Development of delight in the activity of thinking
  3. The outcome, the abstract to which education is to proceed, is an
interest in intellectual matters for their own sake, a delight in thinking
for the sake of thinking It is an old story that acts and processes which
at the Outset are incidental to something else develop an maintain an
absorbing value of their own. So it is wit thinking and with knowledge; at
first incidental to results and adjustments beyond themselves, they attract
more and more attention to themselves till they become ends, not means.
Children engage, unconstainedly and continually, in reflective inspection
and testing for the sake of what they are interested in doing
successfully.  Habits of thinking thus generated may increase in volume
[pic]
(142) and extent till they become of importance on their own account.
  Examples of the transition
  The three instances cited in Chapter Six represented an ascending cycle
from the practical to the theoretical. Taking thought to keep a personal
engagement is obviously of the concrete kind. Endeavoring to work out the
meaning of a certain part of a boat is an instance of an intermediate kind.
The reason for the existence and position of the pole is a practical
reason, so that to the architect, the problem was purely concrete -the
maintenance of a certain system of action. But for the passenger on the
boat, the problem was theoretical, more or less speculative. It made no
difference to his reaching his destination whether he worked out the
meaning of the pole. The third case, that of the appearance and movement of
the bubbles, illustrates a strictly theoretical or abstract case. No
overcoming of physical obstacles, no adjustment of external means to ends,
is at stake. Curiosity, intellectual curiosity, is challenged by a
seemingly anomalous occurrence; and thinking tries simply to account for an
apparent exception in terms of recognized principles.
  Theoretical knowledge never the whole end
  (i) Abstract thinking, it should be noted, represents an end, not the end.
The power of sustained thinking on matters remote from direct use is an
outgrowth of practical and immediate modes of thought, but not a substitute
for them. The educational end is not the destruction of power to think so
as to surmount obstacles and adjust means and ends; it is not its
replacement by abstract reflection. Nor is theoretical thinking a higher
type of thinking than practical. A person who has at command both types of
thinking is of a higher order than he who possesses only one. Methods that
in de-
[pic]
(143)-veloping abstract intellectual abilities weaken habits of practical
or concrete thinking, fall as much short of the educational ideal as do the
methods that in cultivating ability to plan, to invent, to arrange, to
forecast, fail to secure some delight in thinking irrespective of practical
consequences.
  Nor that most congenial to the majority of pupils
  (ii) Educators should also note the very great individual differences that
exist; they should not try to force one pattern and model upon all. In many
(probably the majority) the executive tendency, the habit of mind that
thinks for purposes of conduct and achievement, not for the sake of
knowing, remains dominant to the end. Engineers, lawyers, doctors,
merchants, are much more numerous in adult life than scholars, scientists,
and philosophers. While education should strive to make men who, however
prominent their professional interests and aims, partake of the spirit of
the scholar, philosopher, and scientist, no good reason appears why
education should esteem the one mental habit inherently superior to the
other, and deliberately try to transform the type from practical to
theoretical. Have not our schools (as already suggested, P. 49) been one-
sidedly devoted to the more abstract type of thinking, thus doing injustice
to the majority of pupils? Has not the idea of a "liberal " and "humane"
education tended too often in practice to the production of technical,
because overspecialized, thinkers?
  Aim of education is a working balance
  The aim of education should be to secure a balanced interaction of the two
types of mental attitude, having sufficient regard to the disposition of
the individual not to hamper and cripple whatever powers are naturally
strong in him. The narrowness of individuals of strong concrete bent needs
to be liberalized. Every oppor-
[pic]
(144)-tunity that occurs within their practical activities for developing
curiosity and susceptibility to intellectual problems should be seized.
Violence is not done to natural disposition, but the latter is broadened.
As regards the smaller number of those who have a taste for abstract,
purely intellectual topics, pains should be taken to multiply opportunities
and demands for the application of ideas; for translating symbolic truths
into terms of social life and its ends. Every human being has both
capabilities, and every individual will be more effective and happier if
both powers are developed in easy and close interaction with each other.
                                                                       Notes
  No notes
                               Chapter 11: Empirical and Scientific Thinking
                                                     ? I. Empirical Thinking
Empirical thinking depends on past habits
  Apart from the development of scientific method, inferences depend upon
habits that have been built up under the influence of a number of
particular experiences not themselves arranged for logical purposes. A
says, "It will probably rain to-morrow." B asks, "Why do you think so ? "
and A replies, " Because the sky was lowering at sunset." When B asks, "
What has that to do with it? " A responds, " I do not know, but it
generally does rain after such a sunset." He. does not perceive any
connection between the appearance of the sky and coming rain; he is not
aware of any continuity in the facts themselves -any law or principle, as
we usually say. He simply, from frequently recurring con. junctions of the
events, has associated them so that when he sees one he thinks of the
other. One suggests the other, or is associated with it. A man may believe
it will rain to-morrow because he has consulted the barometer; but if he
has no conception how the height of the mercury column (or the position of
an index moved by its rise and fall) is connected with variations of
atmospheric pressure, and how these in turn are connected with the amount
of moisture in the air, his belief in the likelihood of rain is purely
empirical. When men lived in the open and got their living by hunting,
fishing, or
[pic]
(146) pasturing flocks, the detection of the signs and indications of
weather changes was a matter of great importance. A body of proverbs and
maxims, forming an extensive section of traditionary folklore, was
developed. But as long as there was no understanding why or how certain
events were signs, as long as foresight and weather shrewdness rested
simply upon repeated conjunction among facts, beliefs about the weather
were thoroughly empirical.
  It is fairly adequate in some matters
  In similar fashion learned men in the Orient learned to predict, with
considerable accuracy, the recurrent positions of the planets, the sun and
the moon, and to foretell the time of eclipses, without understanding in
any degree the laws of the movements of heavenly bodies ― that is, without
having a notion of the continuities existing among the facts themselves.
They had learned from repeated observations that things happened in about
such and such a fashion. Till a comparatively recent time, the truths of
medicine were mainly in the same condition. Experience had shown that "
upon the whole," " as a rule," " generally or usually speaking," certain
results followed certain remedies, when symptoms were given. Our beliefs
about human nature in individuals (psychology) and in masses (sociology)
are still very largely of a purely empirical sort. Even the science of
geometry, now frequently reckoned a typical rational science, began, among
the Egyptians, as an accumulation of recorded observations about methods of
approximate mensuration of land surfaces and only gradually assumed, among
the Greeks, scientific form.
  The disadvantages of purely empirical thinking are obvious.
[pic]
  (147)
  but is very apt to lead to false beliefs,
  I. While many empirical conclusions are, roughly speaking, correct; while
they are exact enough to be of great help in practical life; while the
presages of a weatherwise sailor or hunter may be more accurate, within a
certain restricted range, than those of a scientist who relies wholly upon
scientific observations and tests; while, indeed, empirical observations
and records furnish the raw or crude material of scientific knowledge, yet
the empirical method affords no way of discriminating between right and
wrong conclusions. Hence it is responsible for a multitude of false
beliefs. The technical designation for one of the commonest fallacies is
post hoc, ergo propter hoc; the belief that because one thing comes after
another, it comes because of the other. Now this fallacy of method is the
animating principle of empirical conclusions, even when correct ― the
correctness being almost as much a matter of good luck as of method. That
potatoes should be planted only during the crescent moon, that near the sea
people are born at high tide and die at low tide, that a comet is an omen
of danger, that bad luck follows the cracking of a mirror, that a patent
medicine cures a disease ― these and a thousand like notions are
asseverated on the basis of empirical coincidence and conjunction.
Moreover, habits of expectation and belief are formed otherwise than by a
number of repeated similar cases.
  and does not enable use to cope with the novel,
  2. The more numerous the experienced instances and the closer the watch
kept upon them, the greater is the trustworthiness of constant conjunction
as evidence of connection among the things themselves. Many of our most
important beliefs still have only this sort of warrant. No one can yet
tell, with certainty, the neces-
[pic]
(148) -sary cause of old age or of death ― which are empirically the most
certain of all expectations. But even the most reliable beliefs of this
type fail when they confront the novel. Since they rest upon past
uniformities, they are useless when further experience departs in any
considerable measure from ancient incident and wonted precedent. Empirical
inference follows the grooves and ruts that custom wears, and has no track
to follow when the groove disappears. So important is this aspect of the
matter that Clifford found the difference between ordinary skill and
scientific thought right here. "Skill enables a man-to deal with the same
circumstances that he has met before, scientific thought enables him to
deal with different circumstances that he has never met before." And he
goes so far as to define scientific thinking as "the application of old
experience to new circumstances."
  and leads to laziness and presumption,
  3. We have not yet made the acquaintance of the most harmful feature of
the empirical method. Mental inertia, laziness, unjustifiable conservatism,
are its probable accompaniments. Its general effect upon mental attitude is
more serious than even the specific wrong conclusions in which it has
landed. Wherever the chief dependence in forming inferences is upon the
conjunctions observed in past experience, failures to agree with the usual
order are slurred over, cases of successful confirmation are exaggerated.
Since the mind naturally demands some principle of continuity, some
connecting link between separate f acts and causes, forces are arbitrarily
invented for that purpose. Fantastic and mythological explanations are
resorted to in order to supply missing links. The pump brings water because
nature abhors a vacuum; opium makes men sleep because it has a dormi-
[pic]
(149)-tive potency; we recollect a past event because we have a faculty of
memory. In the history of the progress of human knowledge, out and out
myths accompany the first stage of empiricism; while " hidden essences "
and " occult forces " mark its second stage. By their very nature, these "
causes " escape observation, so that their explanatory value can be neither
confirmed nor refuted by further observation or experience. Hence belief in
them becomes purely traditionary. They give rise to doctrines which,
inculcated and handed down, become dogmas; subsequent inquiry and
reflection are actually stifled. (Ante, p. 23.)
  and to dogmatism
  Certain men or classes of men come to be the accepted guardians and
transmitters ― instructors ― of established doctrines. To question the
beliefs is to question their authority to accept the beliefs is evidence of
loyalty to the powers that be, a proof of good citizenship. Passivity,
docility, acquiescence, come to be primal intellectual virtues. Facts and
events presenting novelty and variety are slighted, or are sheared down
till they fit into the Procrustean bed of habitual belief. Inquiry and
doubt are silenced by citation of ancient laws or a multitude of
miscellaneous and unsifted cases. This attitude of mind generates dislike
of change, and the resulting aversion to novelty is fatal to progress. What
will not fit into the established canons is outlawed; men who make new
discoveries are objects of suspicion and even of persecution. Beliefs that
perhaps originally were the products of fairly extensive and careful
observation are stereotyped into fixed traditions and semisacred dogmas
accepted simply upon authority, and are mixed with fantastic conceptions
that happen to have won the acceptance of authorities.
[pic]
                                                      ? 2. Scientific Method
  Scientific thinking analyzes the present case
  In contrast with the empirical method stands the scientific. Scientific
method replaces the repeated cone junction or coincidence of separate facts
by discovery of a single comprehensive fact, effecting this replacement by
breaking up the coarse or gross facts of observation into a number of
minuter processes not directly accessible to perception.
  Illustration from suction of empirical method,
  If a layman were asked why water rises from the cistern when an ordinary
pump is worked, he would doubtless answer, " By suction." Suction is
regarded as a force like heat or pressure. If such a person is confronted
by the fact that water rises with a suction pump only about thirty-three
feet, he easily disposes of the difficulty on the ground that all forces
vary in their intensities and finally reach a limit at which they cease to
operate. The variation with elevation above the sea level of the height to
which water can be pumped is either unnoticed, or, if noted, is dismissed
as one of the curious anomalies in which nature abounds.
  of scientific method
  Relies on differences,
  Now the scientist advances by assuming that what seems to observation to
be a single total fact is in truth complex. He attempts, therefore, to
break up the single fact of water-rising-in-the-pipe into a number of
lesser facts. His method of proceeding is by varying conditions one by one
so far as possible, and noting just what happens when a given condition is
eliminated. There are two methods for varying conditions.[1] The first is
an extension of the empirical method of observation. It consists in
comparing very carefully the results of a great number of observations
which have occurred
[pic]
(151) under accidentally different conditions. The difference in the rise
of the water at different heights above the sea level, and its total
cessation when the distance to be lifted is, even at sea level, more than
thirty-three feet, are emphasized, instead of being slurred over. The
purpose is to find out what special conditions are present when the effect
occurs and absent when it fails to occur. These special conditions are then
substituted for the gross fact, or regarded as its principle-the key to
understanding it.
  and creates differences
  The method of analysis by comparing cases is, however, badly handicapped;
it can do nothing until it is presented with a certain number of
diversified cases. And even when different cases are at hand, it will be
questionable whether they vary in just these respects in which it is
important that they should vary in order to throw light upon the question
at issue. The method is passive and dependent upon external accidents.
Hence the superiority of the active or experimental method. Even a small
number of observations may suggest an explanation -a hypothesis or theory.
Working upon this suggestion, the scientist may then intentionally vary
conditions and note what happens. If the empirical observations have
suggested to him the possibility of a connection between air pressure on
the water and the rising of the water in the tube where air pressure is
absent, he deliberately empties the air out of the vessel in which the
water is contained and notes that suction no longer works ; or he
intentionally increases atmospheric pressure on the water and notes the
result. He institutes experiments to calculate the weight of air at the sea
level and at various levels above, and compares the results of reasoning
based upon the pressure of air
[pic]
(152) of these various weights upon a certain volume of water with the
results actually obtained by observation. Observations formed by variation
of conditions on the basis of some idea or theory constitute experiment.
Experiment is the chief resource in scientific reasoning because it
facilitates the picking out of significant elements in a gross, vague
whole.
  Analysis and synthesis again
  Experimental thinking, or scientific reasoning, is thus a conjoint process
of analysis and synthesis, or, in less technical language, of
discrimination and assimilation or identification. The gross fact of water
rising when the suction valve is worked is resolved or discriminated into a
number of independent variables, some of which had never before been
observed or even thought of in connection with the fact. One of these
facts, the weight of the atmosphere, is then selectively seized upon as the
key to the entire phenomenon. This disentangling constitutes analysis. But
atmosphere and its pressure or weight is a fact not confined to this single
instance. It is a fact familiar or at least discoverable as operative in a
great number of other events. In fixing upon this imperceptible and minute
fact as the essence or key to the elevation of water by the pump, the pump-
fact has thus been assimilated to a whole group of ordinary facts from
which it was previously isolated. This assimilation constitutes synthesis.
Moreover, the fact of atmospheric pressure is itself a case of one of the
commonest of all facts ― weight or gravitational force. Conclusions that
apply to the common fact of weight are thus transferable to the
consideration and interpretation of the relatively rare and exceptional
case of the suction of water. The suction pump is seen to be a case of the
same kind or sort as the siphon, the
[pic]
(153) barometer, the rising of the balloon, and a multitude of other things
with which at first sight it has no connection at all. This is another
instance of the synthetic or assimilative phase of scientific thinking.
  If we revert to the advantages of scientific over empirical thinking, we
find that we now have the clue to them.
  Lessened liability to error
  (a) The increased security, the added factor of certainty or proof, is due
to the substitution of the detailed and specific fact of atmospheric
pressure for the gross and t otal and relatively miscellaneous fact of
suction. The latter is complex, and its complexity is due to many unknown
and unspecified factors; hence, any statement about it is more or less
random, and likely to be defeated by any unforeseen variation of
circumstances. Comparatively, at least, the minute and detailed fact of air
pressure is a measurable and definite fact ― one that can be picked out and
managed with assurance.
  Ability to manage the new
  (b) As analysis accounts for the added certainty, so synthesis accounts
for ability to cope with the novel and variable. Weight is a much commoner
fact than atmospheric weight, and this in turn is a much commoner fact than
the workings of the suction pump. To be able to substitute the common and
frequent fact for that which is relatively rare and peculiar is to reduce
the seemingly novel and exceptional to cases of a general and familiar
principle, and thus to bring them under control for interpretation and
prediction.
  As Professor James says : " Think of beat as motion and whatever is true
of motion will be true of heat; but we have a hundred experiences of motion
for every one of heat. Think of rays passing through this lens as cases of
bending toward the perpendicular, and you
[pic]
(154) substitute for the comparatively unfamiliar lens the very familiar
notion of a particular change in direction of a line, of which notion every
day brings us countless examples." [2]
  Interest in the future or in progress
  (c) The change of attitude from conservative reliance upon the past, upon
routine and custom, to faith in progress through the intelligent regulation
of existing conditions, is, of course, the reflex of the scientific method
of experimentation. The empirical method inevitably magnifies the
influences of the past; the experimental method throws into relief the
possibilities of the future. The empirical method says, " Wait till there
is a sufficient number of cases; " the experimental method says, "Produce
the cases." The former depends upon nature's accidentally happening to
present us with certain conjunctions of circumstances; the latter
deliberately and intentionally endeavors to bring about the conjunction. By
this method the notion of progress secures scientific warrant.
  Ordinary experience is controlled largely by the direct strength and
intensity of various occurrences. What is bright, sudden, loud, secures
notice and is given a conspicuous rating. What is dim, feeble, and
continuous gets ignored, or is regarded as of slight importance. Customary
experience tends to the control of thinking by considerations of direct and
immediate strength rather than by those of importance in the long run.
Animals without the power of forecast and planning must, upon the whole,
respond to the stimuli that are most urgent at the moment, or cease to
exist. These stimuli lose nothing of their direct urgency and clamorous
insistency when the thinking power develops; and yet thinking
[pic]
(155) demands the subordination of the immediate stimulus to the remote and
distant. The feeble and the minute may be of much greater importance than
the glaring and the big. The latter may be signs of a force that is already
exhausting itself; the former may indicate the beginnings of a process in
which the whole fortune of the individual is involved. The prime necessity
for scientific thought is that the thinker be freed from the tyranny of
sense stimuli and habit, and this emancipation is also the necessary
condition of progress.
  Illustration from moving water
  Consider the following quotation: " When it first occurred to a reflecting
mind that moving water had a property identical with human or brute force,
namely, the property of setting other masses in motion, overcoming inertia
and resistance, -when the sight of the stream suggested through this point
of likeness the power of the animal,― a new addition was made to the class
of prime movers, and when circumstances permitted, this power could become
a substitute for the others. It may seem to the modern understanding,
familiar with water wheels and drifting rafts, that the similarity here was
an extremely obvious one. But if we put ourselves back into an early state
of mind, when running water affected the mind by its brilliancy, its roar
and irregular devastation, we may easily suppose that to identify this with
animal muscular energy was by no means an obvious effort." [3]
  Value of abstraction
  If we add to these obvious sensory features the various social customs and
expectations which fix the attitude of the individual, the evil of the
subjection of free and fertile suggestion to empirical considerations be-
[pic]
(156) comes clear. A certain power of abstraction, of deliberate turning
away from the habitual responses to a situation, was required before men
could be emancipated to follow up suggestions that in the end are fruitful.
  Experience as inclusive of thought
  In short, the term experience may be interpreted either with reference to
the empirical or the experimental attitude of mind. Experience is not a
rigid and closed thing; it is vital, and hence growing. When dominated by
the past, by custom and routine, it is often opposed to the reasonable, the
thoughtful. But experience also includes the reflection that sets us free
from the limiting influence of sense, appetite, and tradition. Experience
may welcome and assimilate all that the most exact and penetrating thought
discovers. Indeed, the business of education might be defined as just such
an emancipation and enlargement of experience. Education takes the
individual while he is relatively plastic, before he has become so
indurated by isolated experiences as to be rendered hopelessly empirical in
his habit of mind. The attitude of childhood is naive, wondering,
experimental, the world of man and nature is new. Right methods of
education preserve and perfect this attitude, and thereby short-circuit for
the individual the slow progress of the race, eliminating the waste that
comes from inert routine.
                                                                       Notes
     1. The next two paragraphs repeat, for purposes of the present
        discussion, what we have already noted in a different context. See
        p. 88 and p. 99.
     2. Psychology, vol. IL P. 342.
     3. Bain, The Senses and Intellect, third American ed., 1879, P. 492
        (italics not in original).
Part Three: The Training of Thought
                            Chapter 12: Activity and the Training of Thought
  IN this chapter we shall gather together and amplify considerations that
have already been advanced, in various passages of the preceding pages,
concerning the relation of action to thought. We shall follow, though not
with exactness, the order of development in the unfolding human being.
                                            ? I. The Early Stage of Activity
1. The baby's problem determines his thinking
  The sight of a baby often calls out the question: "What do you suppose he
is thinking about?" By the nature of the case, the question is unanswerable
in detail; but, also by the nature of the case, we may be sure about a
baby's chief interest. His primary problem is mastery of his body as a tool
of securing comfortable and effective adjustments to his surroundings,
physical and social. The child has to learn to do almost everything: to
see, to hear, to reach, to handle, to balance the body, to creep, to walk,
and so on. Even if it be true that human beings have even more instinctive
reactions than lower animals, it is also true that instinctive tendencies
are much less perfect in men, and that most of them are
[pic]
(158) of little use till they are intelligently combined and directed. A
little chick just out of the shell will after a few trials peck at and
grasp grains of food with its beak as well as at any later time. This
involves a complicated coordination of the eye and the head. An infant does
not even begin to reach definitely for things that the eye sees till he is
several months old, and even then several weeks' practice is required
before he learns the adjustment so as neither to overreach nor to
underreach. It may not be literally true that the child will grasp for the
moon, but it is true that he needs much practice before he can tell whether
an object is within reach or not. The arm is thrust out instinctively in
response to a stimulus from the eye, and this tendency is the origin of the
ability to reach and grasp exactly and quickly; but nevertheless final
mastery requires observing and selecting the successful movements, and
arranging them in view of an end. These operations of conscious selection
and arrangement constitute thinking, though of a rudimentary type.
  Mastery of the body is an intellectual problem
  Since mastery of the bodily organs is necessary for all later
developments, such problems are both interesting and important, and solving
them supplies a very genuine training of thinking power. The joy the child
shows in learning to use his limbs, to translate what he sees into what he
handles, to connect sounds with sights, sights with taste and touch, and
the rapidity with which intelligence grows in the first year and a half of
life (the time during which the more fundamental problems of the use of the
organism are mastered), are sufficient evidence that the development of
physical control is not a physical but an intellectual achievement.
  Although in the early months the child is mainly oc-
[pic]
  2. The problem of social adjustment and intercourse
  (159) cupied in learning to use his body to accommodate- himself to
physical conditions in a comfortable way and to use things skillfully and
effectively, yet social adjustments are very important. In connection with
parents, nurse, brother, and sister, the child learns the signs of
satisfaction of hunger, of removal of discomfort, of the approach of
agreeable light, color , sound, and so on. His contact with physical things
is regulated by persons, and he soon distinguishes persons as the most
important and interesting of all the objects with which he has to do.
Speech, the accurate adaptation of sounds heard to the movements of tongue
and lips, is, however, the great instrument of social adaptation; and with
the development of speech (usually in the second year) adaptation of the
baby's activities to and with those of other persons gives the keynote of
mental life. His range of possible activities is indefinitely widened as he
watches what other persons do, and as he tries to understand and to do what
they encourage him to attempt. The outline pattern of mental life is thus
set in the first four or five years. Years, centuries, generations of
invention and planning, may have gone to the development of the
performances and occupations of the adults surrounding the child. Yet for
him their activities are direct stimuli; they are part of his natural
environment; they are carried on in physical terms that appeal to his eye,
ear, and touch. He cannot, of course, appropriate their meaning directly
through his senses; but they furnish stimuli to which he responds, so that
his attention is focused upon a higher order of materials and of problems.
Were it not for this process by which the achievements of one generation
form the stimuli that direct the activities of the next, the story of
civilization
[pic]
(160) would be writ in water, and each generation would have laboriously to
make for itself, if it could, its way out of savagery.
  Social adjustment results in imitation but is not caused by it
  Imitation is one (though only one, see p. 47) of the means by which the
activities of adults supply stimuli which are so interesting, so varied, so
complex, and so novel, as to occasion a rapid progress of thought. Mere
imitation, however, would not give rise to thinking; if we could learn like
parrots by simply copying the outward acts of others, we should never have
to think; nor should we know, after we had mastered the copied act, what
was the meaning of the thing we had done. Educators (and psychologists)
have often assumed that acts which reproduce the behavior of others are
acquired merely by imitation. But a child rarely learns by conscious
imitation ; and to say that his imitation is unconscious is to say that it
is not from his standpoint imitation at all. The word, the gesture, the
act, the occupation of another, falls in line with some impulse already
active and suggests some satisfactory mode of expression, some end in which
it may find fulfillment. Having this end of his own, the child then notes
other persons, as he notes natural events, to get further suggestions as to
means of its realization. He selects some of the means he observes, tries
them on, finds them successful or unsuccessful, is confirmed or weakened in
his belief in their value, and so continues selecting, arranging, adapting,
testing, till he can accomplish what he wishes. The onlooker may then
observe the resemblance of this act to some act of an adult, and conclude
that it was acquired by imitation, while as a matter of fact it was
acquired by attention, observation, selection, experimentation, and
confirmation by results. Only
[pic]
(161) because this method is employed is there intellectual discipline and
an educative result. The presence of adult activities plays an enormous
role in the intellectual growth of the child because they add to the
natural stimuli of the world new stimuli which are more exactly adapted to
the needs of a human being, which are richer, better organized, more
complex in range, permitting more flexible adaptations, and calling out
novel reactions. But in utilizing these stimuli the child follows the same
methods that he uses when he is forced to think in order to master his
body.
                               ? 2. Play, Work, and Allied Forms of Activity
  Play indicates the domination of activity by meanings or ideas
  When things become signs, when they gain a representative capacity as
standing for other things, play is transformed from mere physical
exuberance into an activity involving a mental factor. A little girl who
had broken her doll was seen to perform with the leg of the doll all the
operations of washing, putting to bed, and fondling, that she had been
accustomed to perform with the entire doll. The part stood for the whole;
she reacted not to the stimulus sensibly present, but to the meaning
suggested by the sense object. So children use a stone f or a table, leaves
for plates, acorns for cups. So they use their dolls, their trains, their
blocks, their other toys. In manipulating them, they are living not with
the physical things, but in the large world of meanings, natural and
social, evoked by these things. So when children play horse, play store,
play house or making calls, they are subordinating the physically present
to the ideally signified. In this way, a world of meanings, A store of
concepts (so fundamental to all intellectual achievement), is defined and
built up.
[pic]
  Organization of ideas involved in play
  (162) Moreover, not only do meanings thus become familiar as
acquaintances, but they are organized, arranged in groups, made to cohere
in connected ways. A play and a story blend insensibly into each other. The
most fanciful plays of children rarely lose all touch with the mutual
fitness and pertinency of various meanings to one another; the " freest "
plays observe some principles of coherence and unification. They have a
beginning, middle, and end. In games, rules of order run through various
minor acts and bind them into a connected whole. The rhythm, the
competition, and cooperation involved in most plays and games also
introduce organization. There is, then, nothing mysterious or mystical in
the discovery made by Plato and remade by Froebel that play is the chief,
almost the only, mode of education for the child in the years of later
infancy.
  The playful attitude
  Playfulness is a more important consideration than play. The former is an
attitude of mind; the latter is a passing outward manifestation of this
attitude. When things are treated simply as vehicles of suggestion, what is
suggested overrides the thing. Hence the playful attitude is one of
freedom. The person is not bound to the physical traits of things, nor does
he care whether a thing really means (as we say) what he takes it to
represent. When the child plays horse with a broom and cars with chairs,
the fact that the broom does not really represent a horse, or a chair a
locomotive, is of no account. In order, then, that playfulness may not
terminate in arbitrary fancifulness and in building up an imaginary world
alongside the world of actual things, it is necessary that the play
attitude should gradually pass into a work attitude.
  What is work ― work not as mere external perform-
[pic]
  The work attitude is interested in means and ends
  (163)-ance, but as attitude of mind ? It signifies that the person is not
content longer to accept and to act upon the meanings that things suggest,
but demands congruity of meaning with the things themselves. In the natural
course of growth, children come to find irresponsible make-believe plays
inadequate. A fiction is too easy a way out to afford content. There is not
enough stimulus to call forth satisfactory mental response. When this point
is reached, the ideas that things suggest must be applied to the things
with some regard to fitness. A small cart, resembling a "real" cart, with "
real " wheels, tongue, and body, meets the mental demand better than merely
making believe that anything which comes to hand is a cart. Occasionally to
take part in setting a "real" table with "real" dishes brings more reward
than forever to make believe a flat stone is a table and that leaves are
dishes. The interest may still center in the meanings, the things may be of
importance only as amplifying a certain meaning. So far the attitude is one
of play. But the meaning is now of such a character that it must find
appropriate embodiment in actual things.
  The dictionary does not permit us to call such activities work.
Nevertheless, they represent a genuine passage of play into work. For work
(as a mental attitude, not as mere external performance) means interest in
the adequate embodiment of a meaning (a suggestion, purpose, aim) in
objective form through the use of appropriate materials and appliances.
Such an attitude takes advantage of the meanings aroused and built up in
free play, but controls their development by seeing to it that they are
applied to things in ways consistent with the observable structure of the
things themselves.
[pic]
(164)
  and in processes on account of their results
  The point of this distinction between play and work may be cleared up by
comparing it with a more usual way of stating the difference. In play
activity, it is said, the interest is in the activity for its own sake; in
work, it is in the product or result in which the activity terminates.
Hence the former is purely free, while the latter is tied down by the end
to be achieved. When the difference is stated in this sharp fashion, there
is almost always introduced a false, unnatural separation between process
and product, between activity and its achieved outcome. The true
distinction is not between an interest in activity for its own sake and
interest in the external result of that activity, but between an interest
in an activity just as it flows on from moment to moment, and an interest
in an activity as tending to a culmination, to an outcome, and therefore
possessing a thread of continuity binding together its successive stages.
Both may equally exemplify interest in an activity "for its own sake " ;
but in one case the activity in which the interest resides is more or less
casual, following the accident of circumstance and whim, or of dictation;
in the other, the activity is enriched by the sense that it leads
somewhere, that it amounts to something.
  Consequences of the sharp separation of play and work
  Were it not that the false theory of the relation of the play and the work
attitudes has been connected with unfortunate modes of school practice,
insistence upon a truer view might seem an unnecessary refinement. But the
sharp break that unfortunately prevails between the kindergarten and the
grades is evidence that the theoretical distinction has practical
implications. Under the title of play, the former is rendered unduly
symbolic, fanciful, sentimental, and arbitrary; while under the
antithetical caption of work the latter con
  (165)-tains many tasks externally assigned. The former has no end and the
latter an end so remote that only the educator, not the child, is aware
that it is an end.
  There comes a time when children must extend and make more exact their
acquaintance with existing things; must conceive ends and consequences with
sufficient definiteness to guide their actions by them, and must acquire
some technical skill in selecting and arranging means to realize these
ends. Unless these factors are gradually introduced in the earlier play
period, they must be introduced later abruptly and arbitrarily, to the
manifest disadvantage of both the earlier and the later stages.
  False notions of imagination and utility
  The sharp opposition of play and work is usually associated with false
notions of utility and imagination. Activity that is directed upon matters
of home and neighborhood interest is depreciated as merely utilitarian. To
let the child wash dishes, set the table, engage in cooking, cut and sew
dolls' clothes, make boxes that will hold "real things," and construct his
own playthings by using hammer and nails, excludes, so it is said, the
aesthetic and appreciative factor, eliminates imagination, and subjects the
child's development to material and practical concerns; while (so it is
said) to reproduce symbolically the domestic relationships of birds and.
other animals, of human father and mother and child, of workman and
tradesman, of knight, soldier, and magistrate, secures a liberal exercise
of mind, of great moral as well as intellectual value. It has been even
stated that it is over-physical and utilitarian if a child plants seeds and
takes care of growing plants in the kindergarten; while reproducing
dramatically operations of planting, cultivating, reaping, and so on,
either
[pic]
(166) with no physical materials or with symbolic representatives, is
highly educative to the imagination and to spiritual appreciation. Toy
dolls, trains of cars, boats, and engines are rigidly excluded, and the
employ of cubes, balls, and other symbols for representing these social
activities is recommended on the same ground. The more unfitted the
physical object for its imagined purpose, such as a cube for a boat, the
greater is the supposed appeal to the imagination.
  Imagination a medium of realizing the absent and significant
  There are several fallacies in this way of thinking. (a) The healthy
imagination deals not with the unreal, but with the mental realization of
what is suggested. Its exercise is not a flight into the purely fanciful
and ideal, but a method of expanding and filling in what is real. To the
child the homely activities going on about him are not utilitarian devices
for accomplishing physical ends; they exemplify a wonderful world the
depths of which he has not sounded, a world full of the mystery and promise
that attend all the doings of the grown-ups whom he admires. However
prosaic this world may be to the adults who find its duties routine
affairs, to the child it is fraught with social meaning. To engage in it is
to exercise the imagination in constructing an experience of wider value
than any the child has yet mastered.
  Only the already exerienced can be symbolized
  (b) Educators sometimes think children are reacting to a great moral or
spiritual truth when the children's reactions are largely physical and
sensational. Children have great powers of dramatic simulation, and their
physical bearing may seem (to adults prepossessed with a philosophic
theory) to indicate they have been impressed with some lesson of chivalry,
devotion, or nobility, when the children themselves are occupied only
[pic]
(167) with transitory physical excitations. To symbolize great truths far
beyond the child's range of actual experience is an impossibility, and to
attempt it is to invite love of momentary stimulation.
  Useful work is not necessarily labor
  (c) just as the opponents of play in education always conceive of play as
mere amusement, so the opponents of direct and useful activities confuse
occupation with labor. The adult is acquainted with responsible labor upon
which serious financial results depend. Consequently he seeks relief,
relaxation, amusement. Unless children have prematurely worked for hire,
unless they have come under the blight of child labor, no such division
exists for them. Whatever appeals to them at all, appeals directly on its
own account. There is no contrast between doing things for utility and for
fun. Their life is more united and more wholesome. To suppose that
activities customarily performed by adults only under the pressure of
utility may not be done perfectly freely and joyously by children indicates
a lack of imagination. Not the thing done but the quality of mind that goes
into the doing settles what is utilitarian and what is unconstrained and
educative.
                                               ? 3. Constructive Occupations
  The historic growth of sciences out of occupations
  The history of culture shows that mankind's scientific knowledge and
technical abilities have developed, especially in all their earlier stages,
out of the fundamental problems of life. Anatomy and physiology grew out of
the practical needs of keeping healthy and active; geometry and mechanics
out of demands for measuring land, for building, and for making labor-
saving. machines; astronomy has been closely connected with navigation,
keeping record of the passage of time; botany grew out
[pic]
(168) of the requirements of medicine and of agronomy; chemistry has been
associated with dyeing, metallurgy, and other industrial pursuits. In turn,
modern industry is almost wholly a matter of applied science; year by year
the domain of routine and crude empiricism is narrowed by the translation
of scientific discovery into industrial invention. The trolley, the
telephone, the electric light, the steam engine, with all their
revolutionary consequences for social intercourse and control, are the
fruits of science.
  The intellectual possibilities of school occupations
  These facts are full of educational significance. Most children are
preeminently active in their tendencies. The schools have also taken on ―
largely from utilitarian, rather than from strictly educative reasons ― a
large number of active pursuits commonly grouped under the head of manual
training, including also school gardens, excursions, and various graphic
arts. Perhaps the most pressing problem of education at the present moment
is to organize and relate these subjects so that they will become
instruments for forming alert, persistent, and fruitful intellectual
habits. That they take hold of the more primary and native equipment of
children (appealing to their desire to do) is generally recognized; that
they afford great opportunity for training in self-reliant and efficient
social service is gaining acknowledgment. But they may also be used for
presenting typical problems to be solved by personal reflection and
experimentation, and by acquiring definite bodies of knowledge leading
later to more specialized scientific knowledge. There is indeed no magic by
which mere physical activity or deft manipulation will secure intellectual
results. (See P. 43.) Manual subjects may be taught by routine, by
dictation, or by convention as readily
[pic]
(169) as bookish subjects. But intelligent consecutive work in gardening,
cooking, or weaving, or in elementary wood and iron, may be planned which
will inevitably result in students not only amassing information of
practical and scientific importance in botany, zoology chemistry, physics,
and other sciences, but (what is more significant) in their becoming versed
in methods of experimental inquiry and proof.
  Reorganization of the course of study
  That the elementary curriculum is overloaded is a common complaint. The
only alternative to a reactionary return to the educational traditions of
the past lies in working out the intellectual possibilities resident in the
various arts, crafts, and occupations, and reorganizing the curriculum
accordingly. Here, more than elsewhere, are found the means by which the
blind and routine experience of the race may be transformed into
illuminated and emancipated experiment.
                                                                       Notes
  No notes
                            Chapter 13: Language and the Training of Thought
                                       ? I. Language as the Tool of Thinking
Ambiguous position of language
  SPEECH has such a peculiarly intimate connection with thought as to
require special discussion. Although the very word logic comes from logos,
meaning in differently both word or speech, and thought or reason, yet "
words, words, words " denote intellectual barrenness, a sham of thought.
Although schooling has language as its chief instrument (and often as its
chief matter) of study, educational reformers have for centuries brought
their severest indictments against the current use of language in the
schools. The conviction that language is necessary to thinking (is even
identical with it) is met by the contention that language perverts and
conceals thought.
  Language a necessary tool of thinking,
  Three typical views have been maintained regarding the relation of thought
and language: first, that they are identical ; second, that words are the
garb or clothing of thought, necessary not for thought but only for
conveying it; and third (the view we shall here maintain) that while
language is not thought it is necessary for thinking as well as for its
communication. When it is said, however, that thinking is impossible
without language, we must recall that language includes much more than oral
and written speech. Gestures, pictures, monuments, visual images, finger
movements ― anything con-
[pic]
  for it alone fixes meanings
  (171) -sciously employed as a sign is, logically, language. To say that
language is necessary f or thinking is to say that signs are necessary.
Thought deals not with bare things, but with their -meanings, their
suggestions; and meanings, in order to be apprehended, must be embodied in
sensible and particular existences. Without meaning, things are nothing but
blind stimuli or chance sources of pleasure and pain; and since meanings
are not themselves tangible things, they must be anchored by attachment to
some physical existence. Existences that are especially set aside to fixate
and convey meanings are signs or symbols. If a man moves toward another to
throw him out of the room, his movement is not a sign. If, however, the man
points to the door with his hand, or utters the sound go, his movement is
reduced to a vehicle of meaning: it is a sign or symbol. In the case of
signs we care nothing for what they are in themselves, but everything for
what they signify and represent. Canis, hund, chien, dog ― it makes no
difference what the outward thing is, so long as the meaning is presented.
  Limitations of natural symbols
  Natural objects are signs of other things and events. Clouds stand for
rain; a footprint represents game or an enemy; a projecting rock serves to
indicate minerals below the surface. The limitations of natural signs are,
however, great. (i) The physical or direct sense excitation tends to
distract attention from what is meant or indicated.[1] Almost every one
will recall pointing out to a kitten or puppy some object of food, only to
have the animal devote himself to the hand pointing, not to the thing
pointed at. (ii) Where natural signs alone exist, wee are mainly at the
mercy of external happenings; we
[pic]
(172) have to wait until the natural event presents itself in order to be
warned or advised of the possibility of some other event. (iii) Natural
signs, not being originally intended to be signs, are cumbrous, bulky,
inconvenient, unmanageable.
  Artificial signs overcome these restrictions
  It is therefore indispensable for any high development of thought that
there should be also intentional signs. Speech supplies the requirement.
Gestures, sounds, written or printed forms, are strictly physical
existences, but their native value is intentionally subordinated to the
value they acquire as representative of meanings. (i) The direct and
sensible value of faint sounds and minute written or printed marks is very
slight. Accordingly, attention is not distracted from their representative
function. (ii) Their production is under our direct control so that they
may be produced when needed. When we can make the word rain, we do not have
to wait for some physical forerunner of rain to call our thoughts in that
direction. We cannot make the cloud; we can make the sound, and as a token
of meaning the sound serves the purpose as well as the cloud. (iii)
Arbitrary linguistic signs are convenient and easy to manage. They are
compact, portable, and delicate. As long as we live we breathe; and
modifications by the muscles of throat and mouth of the volume and quality
of the air are simple, easy, and indefinitely controllable. Bodily postures
and gestures of the hand and arm are also employed as signs, but they are
coarse and unmanageable compared with modifications of breath to produce
sounds. No wonder that oral speech has been selected as the main stuff of
intentional intellectual signs. Sounds, while subtle, refined, and easily
modifiable, are transitory. This defect is met by the system of written
[pic]
(173) and printed words, appealing to the eye. Litera scripta manet.
  Bearing in mind the intimate connection of meanings and signs (or
language), we may note in more detail what language does (I) for specific
meanings, and (2) for the organization of meanings.
  I. Individual Meanings. A verbal sign (a) selects, detaches, a meaning
from what is otherwise a vague flux and blur (see p. 121); (b) it retains,
registers, stores that meaning; and (c) applies it, when needed, to the
comprehension of other things. Combining these various functions in a
mixture of metaphors, we may say that a linguistic sign is a fence, a
label, and a vehicle ― all in one.
  A sign makes a meaning distinct
  (a) Every one has experienced how learning an appropriate name for what
was dim and vague cleared up and crystallized the whole matter. Some
meaning seems almost within reach, but is elusive ; it refuses to condense
into definite form; the attaching of a word somehow (just how, it is almost
impossible to say) puts limits around the meaning, draws it out from the
void, makes it stand out as an entity on its own account. When Emerson said
that he would almost rather know the true name, the poet's name, for a
thing, than to know the thing itself, he presumably had this irradiating
and illuminating function of language in mind. The delight that children
take in demanding and learning the names of everything about them indicates
that meanings are becoming concrete individuals to them, so that their
commerce with things is passing from the physical to the intellectual
plane. It is hardly surprising that savages attach a magic efficacy to
words. To name anything is to give it a title; to dignify and honor it by
[pic]
(174) raising it from a mere physical occurrence to a meaning that is
distinct and permanent. To know the names of people and things and to be
able to manipulate these names is, in savage lore, to be in possession of
their dignity and worth, to master them.
  A sign preserves a meaning
  (b) Things come and go; or we come and go, and either way things escape
our notice. Our direct sensible relation to things is very limited. The
suggestion of meanings by natural signs is limited to occasions of direct
contact or vision. But a meaning fixed by a linguistic sign is conserved
for future use. Even if the thing is not there to represent the meaning,
the word may be produced so as to evoke the meaning. Since intellectual
life depends on possession of a store of meanings, the importance of
language as a tool of preserving meanings cannot be overstated. To be sure,
the method of storage is not wholly aseptic; words often corrupt and modify
the meanings they are supposed to keep intact, but liability to infection
is a price paid by every living thing for the privilege of living.
  A sign transfers a meaning
  (c) When a meaning is detached and fixed by a sign, it is possible to use
that meaning in a new context and situation. This transfer and
reapplication is the key to all judgment and inference. It would little
profit a man to recognize that a given particular cloud was the premonitor
of a given particular rainstorm if his recognition ended there, for he
would then have to learn over and over again, since the next cloud and the
next rain are different events. No cumulative growth of intelligence would
occur; experience might form habits of physical adaptation but it would not
teach anything, for we should not be able to use a prior experience
consciously to anticipate and regulate a further experience. To be able to
use
[pic]
(175) the past to judge and infer the new and unknown implies that,
although the past thing has gone, its meaning abides in such a way as to be
applicable in determining the character of the new. Speech forms are our
great carriers: the easy-running vehicles by which meanings are transported
from experiences that no longer concern us to those that are as yet dark
and dubious.
  Logical organization depends upon signs
  II. Organization of Meanings. In emphasizing the importance of signs in
relation to specific meanings, we have overlooked another aspect, equally
valuable. Signs not only mark off specific or individual meanings, but they
are also instruments of grouping meanings in relation to one another. Words
are not only names or titles of single meanings; they also form sentences
in which meanings are organized in relation to one another. When we say "
That book is a dictionary," or " That blur of light in the heavens is
Halley's comet," we express a logical connection ― an act of classifying
and defining that goes beyond the physical thing into the logical region of
genera and species, things and attributes. Propositions, sentences, bear
the same relation to judgments that distinct words, built up mainly by
analyzing propositions in their various types, bear to meanings or
conceptions; and just as words imply a sentence, so a sentence implies a
larger whole of consecutive discourse into which it fits. As is often said,
grammar expresses the unconscious logic of the popular mind. The chief
intellectual classifications that constitute the working capital Of thought
have been built up for us by our mother tongue. Our very lack of explicit
consciousness in using language that we are employing the intellectual
systematizations Of the race shows how thoroughly accustomed we have become
to its logical distinctions and groupings.
[pic]
                           ? 2. The Abuse of Linguistic Methods in Education
  Teaching merely things, not educative
  Taken literally, the maxim," Teach things, not words," or "Teach things
before words," would be the negation of education; it would reduce mental
life to mere physical and sensible adjustments. Learning, in the proper
sense, is not learning things, but the meanings of things, and this process
involves the use of signs, or language in its generic sense. In like
fashion, the warfare of some educational reformers against symbols, if
pushed to extremes, involves the destruction of the intellectual life,
since this lives, moves, and has its being in those processes of
definition, abstraction, generalization, and classification that are made
possible by symbols alone. Nevertheless, these contentions of educational
reformers have been needed. The liability of a thing to abuse is in
proportion to the value of its right use.
  But words separated from things are not true signs
  Symbols are themselves, as pointed out above,― particular, physical,
sensible existences, like any other things. They are symbols only by virtue
of what they suggest and represent, ie. meanings. (i) They stand for these
meanings to any individual only when he has had experience of some
situation to which these meanings are actually relevant. Words can detach
and preserve a meaning only when the meaning has been first involved in our
own direct intercourse with things. To attempt to give a meaning through a
word alone without any dealings with a thing is to deprive the word of
intelligible signification; against this attempt, a tendency only too
prevalent in education, reformers have protested. Moreover, there is a
tendency to assume that whenever there is a definite word or form of speech
there is also a definite idea; while, as a matter of fact, adults and
children alike are capable of using even precise verbal formulae
[pic]
(177) with only the vaguest and most confused sense of what they mean.
Genuine ignorance is more profitable because likely to be accompanied by
humility, curiosity, and open-mindedness; while ability to repeat
catchphrases, cant terms, familiar propositions, gives the conceit of
learning and coats the mind with a varnish waterproof to new ideas.
  Language tends to arrest personal inquiry and reflection
  (ii) Again, although new combinations of words without the intervention of
physical things may supply new ideas, there are limits to this possibility.
Lazy inertness causes individuals to accept ideas that have currency about
them without personal inquiry and testing. A man uses thought, perhaps, to
find out what others believe, and then stops. The ideas of others as
embodied in language become substitutes for one's own ideas. The use of
linguistic studies and methods to halt the human mind on the level of the
attainments of the past, to prevent new inquiry and discovery, to put the
authority of tradition in place of the authority of natural facts and laws,
to reduce the individual to a parasite living on the secondhand experience
of others -these things have been the source of the reformers' protest
against the preeminence assigned to language in schools.
  Word as mere stimuli
  Finally, words that originally stood for ideas come, with repeated use, to
be mere counters; they become physical things to be manipulated according
to certain rules, or reacted to by certain operations without consciousness
of their meaning, Mr. Stout (who has called such terms " substitute signs
remarks that " algebraical and arithmetical signs are to a great extent
used as mere substitute signs. . . . It is possible to use signs of this
kind whenever fixed and definite rules of opera-
[pic]
(178) -tion can be derived from the nature of the things symbolized, so as
to be applied in manipulating the signs, without further reference to their
signification. A word is an instrument for thinking about the meaning which
it expresses; a substitute sign is a means of not thinking about the
meaning which it symbolizes." The principle applies, however, to ordinary
words, as well as to algebraic signs; they also enable us to use meanings
so as to get results without thinking. In many respects, signs that are
means of not thinking are of great advantage; standing for the familiar,
they release attention for meanings that, being novel, require conscious
interpretation. Nevertheless, the premium put in the schoolroom upon
attainment of technical facility, upon skill in producing external results
(ante, P. 5 1), often changes this advantage into a positive detriment. In
manipulating symbols so as to recite well, to get and give correct answers,
to follow prescribed formulae of analysis, the pupil's attitude becomes
mechanical, rather than thoughtful; verbal memorizing is substituted for
inquiry into the meaning of things. This danger is perhaps the one
uppermost in mind when verbal methods of education are attacked.
                        ? 3. The Use of Language in its Educational Bearings
  Language stands in a twofold relation to the work of education. On the one
hand, it is continually used in all studies as well as in all the social
discipline of the school; on the other, it is a distinct object of study .
We shall consider only the ordinary use of language, since its effects upon
habits of thought are much deeper than those of conscious study.
  The common statement that " language is the expres-
[pic]
  Language not primarily intellectual in purpose
  (179) -sion of thought " conveys only a half-truth, and a half-truth that
is likely to result in positive error. Language does express thought, but
not primarily, nor, at first, even consciously. The primary motive for
language is to influence (through the expression of desire, emotion, and
thought) the activity of others; its secondary use is to enter into more
intimate sociable relations with them; its employment as. a conscious
vehicle of thought and knowledge is a tertiary, and relatively late,
formation. The contrast is well brought out by the statement of John Locke
that words have a double use, ― "civil " and "philosophical." "By their
civil use, I mean such a communication of thoughts and ideas by words as
may serve for the upholding of common conversation and commerce about the
ordinary affairs and conveniences of civil life. . . . By the philosophical
use of words, I mean such a use of them as may serve to convey the precise
notions of things, and to express in general propositions certain and
undoubted truths."
  Hence education has to transform it into an intellectual tool
  This distinction of the practical and social from the intellectual use of
language throws much light on the problem of the school in respect to
speech. That problem is to direct pupils' oral and written speech, used
Primarily for practical and social ends, so that gradually it shall become
a conscious toot of conveying knowledge and assisting thought. How without
checking the spontaneous, natural motives ― motives to which language owes
its vitality, force, vividness, and variety ― are we to modify speech
habits so as to render them accurate and flexible intellectual instruments
? It is comparatively easy to encourage the original spontaneous flow and
not make language over into a servant of reflective thought; it is
comparatively easy to check and
[pic]
(180) almost destroy (so far as the schoolroom is concerned) native aim and
interest, and to set up artificial and formal modes of expression in some
isolated and technical matters. The difficulty lies in making over habits
that have to do with " ordinary affairs and conveniences " into habits
concerned with " precise notions." The successful accomplishing of the
transformation requires (i) enlargement of the pupil's vocabulary; (ii)
rendering its terms more precise and accurate, and (iii) formation of
habits of consecutive discourse.
  To enlarge vocabulary, the fund of concepts should be enlarged
  (i) Enlargement of vocabulary. This takes place, of course, by wider
intelligent contact with things and persons, and also vicariously, by
gathering the meanings of words f rom the context in which they are heard
or read. To grasp by either method a word in its meaning is to exercise
intelligence, to perform an act of intelligent selection or analysis, and
it is also to widen the fund of meanings or concepts readily available in
further intellectual enterprises (ante, p. 126). It is usual to distinguish
between one's active and one's passive vocabulary, the latter being
composed of the words that are understood when they are heard or seen, the
former of words that are used intelligently. The fact that the passive
vocabulary is ordinarily much larger than the active indicates a certain
amount of inert energy, of power not freely controlled by an individual.
Failure to use meanings that are nevertheless understood reveals dependence
upon external stimulus, and lack of intellectual initiative. This mental
laziness is to some extent an artificial product of education. Small
children usually attempt to put to use every new word they get hold of, but
when they learn to read they are introduced to a large variety of terms
that there is no ordinary opportunity to use.
[pic]
(181) The result is a kind of mental suppression, if not smothering.
Moreover, the meaning of words not actively used in building up and
conveying ideas is never quite clear cut or complete.
  Looseness of thinking accompanies a limited vocabulary
  While a limited vocabulary may be due to a limited range of experience, to
a sphere of contact with persons and things so narrow as not to suggest or
require a full store of words, it is also due to carelessness and
vagueness. A happy-go-lucky frame of mind makes the individual averse to
clear discriminations, either in perception or in his own speech. Words are
used loosely in an indeterminate kind of reference to things, and the mind
approaches a condition where practically everything is just a thing-um-bob
or a what-do-you-call-it. Paucity of vocabulary on the part of those with
whom the child associates, triviality and meagerness in the child's reading
matter (as frequently even in his school readers and textbooks), tend to
shut down the area of mental vision.
  Command of language involves command of things
  We must note also the great difference between flow of words and command
of language. Volubility is not necessarily a sign of a large vocabulary;
much talking or even ready speech is quite compatible with moving round and
round in a circle of moderate radius. Most schoolrooms suffer from a lack
of materials and appliances save perhaps books ― and even these are "
written down " to the supposed capacity, or incapacity, of children.
Occasion and demand for an enriched vocabulary are accordingly restricted.
The vocabulary of things studied in the schoolroom is very largely
isolated; it does not link itself organically to the range of the ideas and
words that are in vogue outside the school. Hence the enlargement that
takes place is often nominal,
[pic]
(182) adding to the inert, rather than to the active, fund of meanings and
terms.
  (ii) Accuracy of vocabulary. One way in which the fund of words and
concepts is increased is by discovering and naming shades of meaning ― that
is to say, by making the vocabulary more precise. Increase in definiteness
is as important relatively as is the enlargement of the capital stock
absolutely.
  The general as the vague and as the distinctly generic
  The first meanings of terms, since they are due to superficial
acquaintance with things, are general in the sense of being vague. The
little child calls all men papa; acquainted with a dog, he may call the
first horse he sees a big dog. Differences of quantity and intensity are
noted, but the fundamental meaning is so vague that it covers things that
are f ar apart. To many persons trees are just trees, being discriminated
only into deciduous trees and evergreens, with perhaps recognition of one
or two kinds of each. Such vagueness tends to persist and to become a
barrier to the advance of thinking. Terms that are miscellaneous in scope
are clumsy tools at best; in addition they are frequently treacherous, for
their ambiguous reference causes us to conf use things that should be
distinguished.
  Twofold growth of words in sense or signification
  The growth of precise terms out of original vagueness takes place normally
in two directions: toward words that stand for relationships and words that
stand for highly individualized traits (compare what was said about the
development of meanings, p. 122); the first being associated with abstract,
the second with concrete, thinking. Some Australian tribes are said to have
no words for animal or for plant, while they have specific names for every
variety of plant and animal in their neighborhoods. This minuteness of
vocabulary repre-
[pic]
(183)-sents progress toward definiteness, but in a one-sided way. specific
properties are distinguished, but not relationships.[2] On the other hand,
students of philosophy and of the general aspects of natural and social
science are apt to acquire a store of terms that signify relations without
balancing them up with terms that designate specific individuals and
traits. The ordinary use of such terms as causation, law, society,
individual, capital, illustrates this tendency.
  Words alter their meanings so as to change their logical functions
  In the history of language we find both aspects of the growth of
vocabulary illustrated by changes in the sense of words: some words
originally wide in their application are narrowed to denote shades of
meaning; others originally specific are widened to express relationships.
The term vernacular, now meaning mother speech, has been generalized from
the word verna, meaning a slave born in the master's household. Publication
has evolved its meaning of communication by means of print, through
restricting an earlier meaning of any kind of communication ― although the
wider meaning is retained in legal procedure, as publishing a libel. The
sense of the word average has been generalized from a use connected with
dividing loss by shipwreck proportionately among various sharers in an
enterprise.[3]
  These historical changes assist the educator to appreciate the changes
that occur with individuals together with advance in intellectual
resources. In studying
[pic]
  Similar changes occur in the vocabulary of every student
  (184) geometry, a pupil must learn both to narrow and to extend the
meanings of such familiar words as line, surface, angle, square, circle; to
narrow them to the precise meanings involved in demonstrations; to extend
them to cover generic relations not expressed in ordinary usage. Qualities
of color and size must be excluded; relations of direction, of variation in
direction, of limit, must be definitely seized. A like transformation
occurs, of course, in every subject of study. just at this point lies the
danger, alluded to above, of simply overlaying common meanings with new and
isolated meanings instead of effecting a genuine working-over of popular
and practical meanings into adequate logical tools.
  The value of technical terms
  Terms used with intentional exactness so as to express a meaning, the
whole meaning, and only the meaning, are called technical. For educational
purposes, a technical term indicates something relative, not absolute; for
a term is technical not because of its verbal form or its unusualness, but
because it is employed to fix a meaning precisely. Ordinary words get a
technical quality when used intentionally for this end. Whenever thought
becomes more accurate, a (relatively) technical vocabulary grows up.
Teachers are apt to oscillate between extremes in regard to technical
terms. On the one hand, these are multiplied in every direction, seemingly
on the assumption that learning a new piece of terminology, accompanied. by
verbal description or definition, is equivalent to grasping a new idea.
When it is seen how largely the net outcome is the accumulation of an
isolated set of words, a jargon or scholastic cant, and to what extent the
natural power of judgment is clogged by this accumulation, there is a
reaction to the opposite extreme. Technical terms are banished;
[pic]
(185) " name words " exist but not nouns; " action words " but not verbs;
pupils may "take away," but not subtract; they may tell what four fives
are, but not what four times five are, and so on. A sound instinct
underlies this reaction ― aversion to words that give the pretense, but not
the reality, of meaning. Yet the fundamental difficulty is not with the
word, but with the idea. If the idea is not grasped, nothing is gained by
using a more familiar word; if the idea is perceived, the use of the term
that exactly names it may assist in fixing the idea. Terms denoting highly
exact meanings should be introduced only sparingly, that is, a few at a
time; they should be led up to gradually, and great pains should be taken
to secure the circumstances that render precision of meaning significant.
  Importance of consecutive discourse
  (iii) Consecutive discourse. As we saw, language connects and organizes
meanings as well as selects and fixes them. As every meaning is set in the
context of some situation, so every word in concrete use belongs to some
sentence (it may itself represent a condensed sentence), and the sentence,
in turn, belongs to some larger story, description, or reasoning process.
It is unnecessary to repeat what has been said about the importance of
continuity and ordering of meanings. We may, however, note some ways in
which school practices tend to interrupt consecutiveness of language and
thereby interfere harmfully with systematic reflection. (a) Teachers have a
habit of monopolizing continued discourse. Many, if not most, instructors
would be surprised if informed at the end of the day of the amount of time
they have talked as compared with any pupil. Children's conversation is
often confined to answering questions in brief phrases, or in single
disconnected sentences. Expatia-
[pic]
(186)-tion and explanation are reserved for the teacher, who often admits
any hint at an answer on the part of the pupil, and then amplifies what he
supposes the child must have meant. The habits of sporadic and fragmentary
discourse thus promoted have inevitably a disintegrating intellectual
influence.
  Too minute questioning
  (b) Assignment of too short lessons when accompanied (as it usually is in
order to pass the time of the recitation period) by minute " analytic "
questioning has the same effect. This evil is usually at its height in such
subjects as- history and literature, where not infrequently the material is
so minutely subdivided as to break up the unity of meaning belonging to a
given portion of the matter, to destroy perspective, and in effect to
reduce the whole topic to an accumulation of disconnected details all upon
the same level. More often than the teacher is aware, his mind carries and
supplies the background of unity of meaning against which pupils project
isolated scraps.
  Making avoidance of error the aim
  (c) Insistence upon avoiding error instead of attaining power tends also
to interruption of continuous discourse and thought. Children who begin
with something to say and with intellectual eagerness to say it are
sometimes made so conscious of minor errors in substance and form that the
energy that should go into constructive thinking is diverted into anxiety
not to make mistakes, and even, in extreme cases, into passive quiescence
as the best method of minimizing error. This tendency is especially marked
in connection with the writing of compositions, essays, and themes. It has
even been gravely recommended that little children should always write on
trivial subjects and in short sentences because in that way they are less
likely to make mistakes, while
[pic]
(187) the teaching of writing to high school and college students
occasionally reduces itself to a technique for detecting and designating
mistakes. The resulting self-consciousness and constraint are only part of
the evil that comes from a negative ideal.
                                                                       Notes
     1. Compare the quotation from Bain on p. 155.
     2. The term general is itself an ambiguous term, meaning (in its best
        logical sense) the related and also (in its natural usage) the
        indefinite, the vague. General, in the first sense, denotes the
        discrimination of a principle or generic relation ; in the second
        sense, it denotes the absence of discrimination of specific or
        individual properties.
     3. A large amount of material illustrating the twofold change in the
        sense of words will be found in Jevons, Lessons in Logic.
                                     Chapter 14: Observation and Information
                                                     in the Training of Mind
No thinking without acquaintance with facts
  THINKING is an ordering of subject-matter with reference to discovering
what it signifies or indicates. Thinking no more exists apart from this
arranging of subject-matter than digestion occurs apart from the
assimilating of food. The way in which the subject- matter is furnished
marks, therefore, a fundamental point. If the subject-matter is provided in
too scanty or too profuse fashion, if it comes in disordered array or in
isolated scraps, the effect upon habits of thought is detrimental. If
personal observation and communication of information by others (whether in
books or speech) are rightly conducted, half the logical battle is won, for
they are the channels of obtaining subject-matter
                                    ? I. The Nature and Value of Observation
  Fallacy of making "facts" an end in themselves
  The protest, mentioned in the last chapter, of educational reformers
against the exaggerated and false use of language, insisted upon personal
and direct observation as the proper alternative course. The reformers felt
that the current emphasis upon the linguistic factor eliminated all
opportunity for first-hand acquaintance with real things; hence they
appealed to sense-perception to fill the gap. It is not surprising that
this enthusiastic zeal failed frequently to ask how and why
[pic]
(189) observation is educative, and hence fell into the error of making
observation an end in itself and was satisfied with any kind of material
under any kind of conditions. Such isolation of observation is still
manifested in the statement that this faculty develops first, then that of
memory and imagination, and finally the faculty of thought. From this point
of view, observation is regarded as furnishing crude masses of raw
material, to which, later on, reflective processes may be applied. Our
previous pages should have made obvious the fallacy of this point of view
by bringing out the fact that simple concrete thinking attends all our
intercourse with things which is not on a purely physical level.
  The synthetic motive in extending acquaintance
  I. All persons have a natural desire ― akin to curiosity -for a widening
of their range of acquaintance with persons and things. The sign in art
galleries that forbids the carrying of canes and umbrellas is obvious
testimony to the fact that simply to see is not enough for many people;
there is a feeling of lack of acquaintance until some direct contact is
made. This demand for fuller and closer knowledge is quite different from
any conscious interest in observation for its own sake. Desire for
expansion, for " self-realization," is its motive. The interest is
sympathetic, socially and aesthetically sympathetic, rather than cognitive.
While the interest is especially keen in children (because their actual
experience is so small and their possible experience so large), it still
characterizes adults when routine has not blunted its edge. This
sympathetic interest provider, the medium for carrying and binding together
what would otherwise be a multitude of items, diverse, disconnected, and of
no intellectual use. These systems are indeed social and aesthetic rather
than consciously intel-
[pic]
  Analytic inspection for the sake of doing
  (190)-lectual; but they provide the natural medium for more conscious
intellectual explorations. Some educators have recommended that nature
study in the elementary schools be conducted with a love of nature and a
cultivation of aesthetic appreciation in view rather than in a purely
analytic spirit. Others have urged making much of the care of animals and
plants. Both of these important recommendations have grown out of
experience, not out of theory, but they afford excellent exemplifications
of the theoretic point just made.
  Analytic inspection for the sake of doing
  II. In normal development, specific analytic observations are originally
connected almost exclusively with the imperative need for noting means and
ends in carrying on activities. When one is doing something, one is
compelled, if the work is to succeed (unless it is purely routine), to use
eyes, ears, and sense of touch as guides to action. Without a constant and
alert exercise of the senses, not even plays and games can go on; in any
form of work, materials, obstacles, appliances, failures, and successes,
must be intently watched. Sense-perception does not occur for its own sake
or for purposes of training, but because it is an indispensable factor of
success in doing what one is interested in doing. Although not designed for
sense-training, this method effects sense training in the most economical
and thoroughgoing way. Various schemes have been designed by teachers for
cultivating sharp and prompt observation of forms, as by writing words,―
even in an unknown language, making arrangements of figures and geometrical
forms, and having pupils reproduce them after a momentary glance. Children
often attain great skill in quick seeing and full reproducing of even
complicated meaningless combinations. But such methods of training
[pic]
  Direct and indirect sense training
  (191) however valuable as occasional games and diversions compare very
unfavorably with the training of eye and hand that comes as an incident of
work with tools in wood or metals, or of gardening, cooking, or the care of
animals. Training by isolated exercises leaves no deposit, leads nowhere;
and even the technical skill acquired has little radiating power, or
transferable value. Criticisms made upon the training of observation on the
ground that many persons cannot correctly reproduce the forms and
arrangement of the figures on the face of their watches misses the point
because persons do not look at a watch to find out whether four o'clock is
indicated by IIII or by IV, but to find out what time it is, and, if
observation decides this matter, noting other details is irrelevant and a
waste of time. In the training of observation the question of end and
motive is all important.
  Scientific observations are linked to problems
  III. The further, more intellectual or scientific, development of
observation follows the line of the growth of practical into theoretical
reflection already traced (ante, Chapter Ten). As problems emerge and are
dwelt upon, observation is directed less to the facts that bear upon a
practical aim and more upon what bears upon a problem as such. What makes
observations in schools often intellectually ineffective is (more than
anything else) that they are carried on independently of a sense of a
problem that they serve to define or help to solve. The evil of this
isolation is seen through the. entire. educational system, from the
kindergarten, through the elementary and high schools, to the college.
Almost everywhere may be found, at some time, recourse to observations as
if they were of complete and final value in themselves, instead of the
means
[pic]
  "Object-lessons" rarely supply problems
  (192) of getting material that bears upon some difficulty and its
solution. In the kindergarten are heaped up observations regarding
geometrical forms, lines, surfaces, cubes, colors, and so on. In the
elementary school, under the name of " object-lessons," the form and
properties of objects, ― apple, orange, chalk, ― selected almost at random,
are minutely noted, while under the name of " nature study to similar
observations are directed upon leaves, stones, insects, selected in almost
equally arbitrary fashion. In high school and college, laboratory and
microscopic observations are carried on as if the accumulation of observed
facts and the acquisition of skill in manipulation were educational ends in
themselves.
  Compare with these methods of isolated observations the statement of
Jevons that observation as conducted by scientific men is effective " only
when excited and guided by hope of verifying a theory to ; and again, "the
number of things which can be observed and experimented upon are infinite,
and if we merely set to work to record facts without any distinct purpose,
our records will have no value." Strictly speaking, the first statement of
Jevons is too narrow. Scientific men institute observations not merely to
test an idea (or suggested explanatory meaning), but also to locate the
nature of a problem and thereby guide the formation of a hypothesis. But
the principle of his remark, namely, that scientific men never make the
accumulation of observations an end in itself, but always a means to a
general intellectual conclusion, is absolutely sound. Until the force of
this principle is adequately recognized in education, observation will be
largely a matter of uninteresting dead work or of acquiring forms of
technical skill that are not available as intellectual resources.
[pic]
(193)
                    ? 2. Methods and Materials of Observation in the Schools
  The best methods in use in our schools furnish many suggestions for giving
observation its right place in mental training.
  Observation should involve discovery
  I. They rest upon the sound assumption that observation is an active
process. Observation is exploration, inquiry for the sake of discovering
something previously hidden and unknown, this something being needed in
order to reach some end, practical or theoretical. Observation is to be
discriminated from recognition, or perception of what is familiar. The
identification of something already understood is, indeed, an indispensable
function of further investigation (ante, p. 119) ; but it is relatively
automatic and passive, while observation proper is searching and
deliberate. Recognition refers to the already mastered; observation is
concerned with mastering the unknown. The common notions that perception is
like writing on a blank piece of paper, or like impressing an image on the
mind as a seal is imprinted on wax or as a picture is formed on a
photographic plate (notions that have played a disastrous role in
educational methods), arise from a failure to distinguish between automatic
recognition and the searching attitude of genuine observation.
  and suspense during the unfolding change
  II. Much assistance in the selection of appropriate material for
observation may be derived from considering the eagerness and closeness of
observation that attend the following of a story or drama. Alertness of
observation is at its height wherever there is " plot interest." Why?
Because of the balanced combination of the old and the new, of the familiar
and the unexpected. We hang on the lips of the story-teller because of the
element of mental suspense. Alternatives are suggested,
[pic]
(194) but are left ambiguous, so that our whole being questions: What
befell next? Which way did things turn out? Contrast the ease and fullness
with which a child notes all the salient traits of a story, with the labor
and inadequacy of his observation of some dead and static thing where
nothing raises a question or suggests alternative outcomes.
  This "plot interest" manifested in activity,
  When an individual is engaged in doing or making something (the activity
not being of such a mechanical and habitual character that its outcome is
assured), there is an analogous situation. Something is going to come of
what is present to the sense, but just what is doubtful. The plot is
unfolding toward success or failure, but just when or how is uncertain.
Hence the keen and tense observation of conditions and results that attends
constructive manual operations. Where the subject-matter is of a more
impersonal sort, the same principle of movement toward a denouement may
apply. It is a commonplace that what is moving attracts notice when that
which is at rest escapes it. Yet too often it would almost seem as if pains
had been taken to deprive the material of school observations of all life
and dramatic quality, to reduce it to a dead and inert form. Mere change is
not enough, however. Vicissitude, alteration, motion, excite observation;
but if they merely excite it, there is no thought. The changes must (like
the incidents of a well-arranged story or plot) take place in a certain
cumulative order; each successive change must at once remind us of its
predecessor and arouse interest in its successor if observations of change
are to be logically fruitful.
  and in cycles of growth
  Living beings, plants, and animals, fulfill the twofold requirement to an
extraordinary degree. Where there
[pic]
(195) growth, there is motion, change, process; and there is also
arrangement of the changes in a cycle. The first arouses, the second
organizes, observation. Much of the extraordinary interest that children
take in planting seeds and watching the stages of their growth is due to
the fact that a drama is enacting before their eyes; there is something
doing, each step of which is important in the destiny of the plant. The
great practical improvements that have occurred of late years in the
teaching of botany and zoology will be found, upon inspection, to involve
treating plants and animals as beings that act, that do something, instead
of as mere inert specimens having static properties to be inventoried,
named, and registered. Treated in the latter fashion, observation is
inevitably reduced to the falsely " analytic" (ante, p. 112), ― to mere
dissection and enumeration.
  Observation of structure grows out of noting function
  There is, of course, a place, and an important place, for observation of
the mere static qualities of objects. When, however, the primary interest
is in function, in what the object does, there is a motive for more minute
analytic study, for the observation of structure. Interest in noting an
activity passes insensibly into noting bow the activity is carried on; the
interest in what is accomplished passes over into an interest in the organs
of its accomplishing. But when the beginning is made with the
morphological, the anatomical, the noting of peculiarities of form, size,
color, and distribution of parts, the material is so cut off from
significance as to be dead and dull. It is as natural for children to look
intently for the stomata of a plant after they have become interested in
its function of breathing, as it is repulsive to attend minutely to them
when they are considered as isolated peculiarities of structure.
  Observation of structure grows out of noting function
  There is, of course, a place, and an important place, for observation of
the mere static qualities of objects. When, however, the primary interest
is in function, in what the object does, there is a motive for more minute
analytic study, for the observation of structure. Interest in noting an
activity passes insensibly into noting bow the activity is carried on; the
interest in what is accomplished passes over into an interest in the organs
of its accomplishing. But when the beginning is made with the
morphological, the anatomical, the noting of peculiarities of form, size,
color, and distribution of parts, the material is so cut off from
significance as to be dead and dull. It is as natural for children to look
intently for the stomata of a plant after they have become interested in
its function of breathing, as it is repulsive to attend minutely to them
when they are considered as isolated peculiarities of structure.
[pic]
(196)
  Scientific observation should be extensive and intensive
  III. As the center of interest of observations becomes less personal, less
a matter of means for effecting one's own ends, and less aesthetic, less a
matter of contribution of parts to a total emotional effect, observation
becomes more consciously intellectual in quality. Pupils learn to observe
for the sake (i) of finding out what sort of perplexity confronts them;
(ii) of inferring hypothetical explanations for the puzzling features that
observation reveals; and (iii) of testing the ideas thus suggested. In
short, observation becomes scientific in nature. Of such observations it
may be said that they should follow a rhythm between the extensive and the
intensive. Problems become definite, and suggested explanations significant
by a certain alternation between a wide and somewhat loose soaking in of
relevant facts and a minutely accurate study of a few selected facts. The
wider, less exact observation is necessary to give the student a feeling
for the reality of the field of inquiry, a sense of its bearings and
possibilities, and to store his mind with materials that imagination may
transform into suggestions. The intensive study is necessary for limiting
the problem, and for securing the conditions of experimental testing. As
the latter by itself is too specialized and technical to arouse
intellectual growth, the former by itself is too superficial and scattering
for control of intellectual development. In the sciences of life, field
study, excursions, acquaintance with living things in their natural
habitats, may alternate with microscopic and laboratory observation. In the
physical sciences, phenomena of light, of heat, of electricity, of
moisture, of gravity, in their broad setting in nature -physiographic
setting ― should prepare for an exact study of selected facts under
conditions of laboratory
[pic]
(197) control. In this way, the student gets the benefit of technical
scientific methods of discovery and testing, while he retains his sense of
the identity of the laboratory modes of energy with large out-of-door
realities, thereby avoiding the impression (that so often accrues) that the
facts studied are peculiar to the laboratory.
                                           ? 3. Communication of Information
  Importance of hearsay acquaintance
  When all is said and done the field of fact open to any one observer by
himself is narrow. Into every one of our beliefs, even those that we have
worked out under the conditions of utmost personal, first-hand
acquaintance, much has insensibly entered from what we have heard or read
of the observations and conclusions of others. In spite of the great
extension of direct observation in our schools, the vast bulk of
educational subject-matter is derived from other sources -from text-book,
lecture, and viva-voce interchange. No educational question is of greater
import than how to get the most logical good out of learning through
transmission from others.
  Logically, this ranks only as evidence or testimony
  Doubtless the chief meaning associated with the word instruction is this
conveying and instilling of the results of the observations and inferences
of others. Doubtless the undue prominence in education of the ideal of
amassing information (ante, p. 52) has its source in the prominence of the
learning of other persons. The problem then is how to convert it into an
intellectual asset. In logical terms, the material supplied from the
experience of others is testimony: that is to say, evidence submitted by
others to be employed by one's own judgment in reaching a conclusion. How
shall we treat the subject-matter supplied by textbook and teacher so that
it shall rank as material for reflec-
[pic]
(198) -tive inquiry, not as ready-made intellectual pabulum to be accepted
and swallowed just as supplied by the store ?
  Communication  by others should not encroach on observation,
  In reply to this question, we may say (i) that the communication of
material should be needed. That is to say, it should be such as cannot
readily be attained by personal observation. For teacher or book to cram
pupils with facts which, with little more trouble, they could discover by
direct inquiry is to violate their intellectual integrity by cultivating
mental servility. This does not mean that the material supplied through
communication of others should be meager or scanty. With the utmost range
of the senses, the world of nature and history stretches out almost
infinitely beyond. But the fields within which direct observation is
feasible should be carefully chosen and sacredly protected.
  should not be dogmatic in tone,
  (ii) Material should be supplied by way of stimulus, not with dogmatic
finality and rigidity. When pupils get the notion that any field of study
has been definitely surveyed, that knowledge about it is exhaustive and
final, they may continue docile pupils, but they cease to be students. All
thinking whatsoever ― so be it is thinking ― contains a phase of
originality. This originality does not imply that the student's conclusion
varies from the conclusions of others, much less that it is a radically
novel conclusion. His originality is not incompatible with large use of
materials and suggestions contributed by others. Originality means personal
interest in the question, personal initiative in turning over the
suggestions furnished by others, and sincerity in following them out to a
tested conclusion. Literally, the phrase "Think for yourself " is
tautological; any thinking is thinking for one's self.
[pic]
(199)
  should have a relation to a personal problem,
  (iii) The material furnished by way of information should be relevant to a
question that is vital in the student's own experience. What has been said
about the evil of observations that begin and end in themselves may be
transferred without change to communicated learning. Instruction in subject-
matter that does not fit into any problem already stirring in the student's
own experience, or that is not presented in such a way as to arouse a
problem, is worse than useless for intellectual purposes. In that it fails
to enter into any process of reflection, it is useless; in that it remains
in the mind as so much lumber and debris, it is a barrier, an obstruction,
in the way of effective thinking when a problem arises.
  and to prior systems of experience
  Another way of stating the same principle is that material furnished by
communication must be such as to enter into some existing system or
organization of experience. All students of psychology are familiar with
the principle of apperception ― that we assimilate new material with what
we have digested and retained from prior experiences. Now the "
apperceptive basis " of material furnished by teacher and text-book should
be found, as far as possible, in what the learner has derived from more
direct forms of his own experience. There is a tendency to connect material
of the schoolroom simply with the material of prior school lessons, instead
of linking it to what the pupil has acquired in his out-of-school
experience. The teacher says, "Do you not remember what we learned from the
book last week? " ― instead of saying, "Do you not recall such and such a
thing that you have seen or heard? " As a result, there are built up
detached and independent systems of school knowledge that inertly overlay
the
[pic]
(200) ordinary systems of experience instead of reacting to enlarge and
refine them. Pupils are taught to live in two separate worlds, one the
world of out-of-school experience, the other the world of books and
lessons.
                                                                       Notes
  No notes
                      Chapter 15: The Recitation and the Training of Thought
Importance of the recitation
  IN the recitation the teacher comes into his closest contact with the
pupil. In the recitation focus the possibilities of guiding children's
activities, influencing their language habits, and directing their
observations. In discussing the significance of the recitation as an
instrumentality of education, we are accordingly bringing to a head the
points considered in the last three chapters, rather than introducing a new
topic. The method in which the recitation is carried on is a crucial test
of a teacher's skill in diagnosing the intellectual state of his pupils and
in supplying the conditions that will arouse serviceable mental responses:
in short, of his art as a teacher.
  Re-citing versus reflecting
  The use of the word recitation to designate the period of most intimate
intellectual contact of teacher with pupil and pupil with pupil is a
fateful fact. To re-cite is to cite again, to repeat, to tell over and
over. If we were to call this period reiteration, the designation would
hardly bring out more clearly than does the word recitation, the complete
domination of instruction by rehearsing of secondhand information, by
memorizing for the sake of producing correct replies at the proper time.
Everything that is said in this chapter is insignificant in comparison with
the primary truth that the recitation is a place and time for stimulating
and directing reflection, and that reproducing memorized
[pic]
(202) matter is only an incident ―even though a indispensable incident ―in
the process of cultivating a thoughtful attitude.
                                        ? I. The Formal Steps of Instruction
  Herbart's analysis of method of teaching
  But few attempts have been made to formulate a method, resting on general
principles, of conducting a recitation. One of these is of great importance
and has probably had more and better influence upon the "hearing of lessons
" than all others put together; namely, the analysis by Herbart of a
recitation into five successive steps. The steps are commonly known as "
the formal steps of instruction." The underlying notion is that no matter
how subjects vary in scope and detail there is one and only one best way of
mastering them, since there is a single " general method " uniformly
followed by the mind in effective attack upon any subject. Whether it be a
first-grade child mastering the rudiments of number, a grammar-school pupil
studying history, or a college student dealing with philology, in each case
the first step is preparation, the second presentation, followed in turn by
comparison and generalization, ending in the application of the
generalizations to specific and new instances.
  Illustration of method
  By preparation is meant asking questions to remind pupils of familiar
experiences of their own that will be useful in acquiring the new topic.
What one already knows supplies the means with which one apprehends the
unknown. Hence the process of learning the new will be made easier if
related ideas in the pupil's mind are aroused to activity ― are brought to
the foreground of consciousness. When pupils take up the study of rivers,
they are first questioned about streams or brooks
[pic]
(203)with which they are already acquainted; if they have never seen any,
they may be asked about water running in gutters. Somehow "apperceptive
masses " are stirred that will assist in getting hold of the new subject.
The step of preparation ends with statement of the aim of the lesson. Old
knowledge having been made active, new material is then "presented " to the
pupils. Pictures and relief models of rivers are shown; vivid oral
descriptions are given ; if possible, the children are taken to see an
actual river. These two steps terminate the acquisition of particular
facts.
  The next two steps are directed toward getting a general principle or
conception. The local river is compared with, perhaps, the Amazon, the St.
Lawrence, the Rhine; by this comparison accidental and unessential features
are eliminated and the river concept is formed: the elements involved in
the river-meaning are gathered together and formulated. This done, the
resulting principle is fixed in mind and is clarified by being applied to
other streams, say to the Thames, the Po, the Connecticut.
  Comparison with our prior analysis of reflection
  If we compare this account of the methods of instruction with our own
analysis of a complete operation of thinking, we are struck by obvious
resemblances. In our statement (compare Chapter Six) the "steps are the
occurrence of a problem or a puzzling phenomenon; then observation,
inspection of facts, to locate and clear up the problem ; then the
formation of a hypothesis or the suggestion of a possible solution together
with its elaboration by reasoning; then the testing of the elaborated idea
by using it as a guide to new observations and experimentations. In each
account, there is the sequence of (i) specific facts and
[pic]
(204) events, (ii) ideas and reasonings, and (iii) application of their
result to specific facts. In each case, the movement is inductive-
deductive. We are struck also by one difference: the Herbartian method
makes no reference to a difficulty, a discrepancy requiring explanation, as
the origin and stimulus of the whole process. As a consequence, it often
seems as if the Herbartian method deals with thought simply as an incident
in the process of acquiring information, instead of treating the latter as
an incident in the process of developing thought.
  The formal steps concern the teacher's preparation rather than the
recitation itself
  Before following up this comparison in more detail, we may raise the
question whether the recitation should, in any case, follow a uniform
prescribed series of steps ― even if it be admitted that this series
expresses the normal logical order. In reply, it may be said that just
because the order is logical, it represents the survey of subject-matter
made by one who already understands it, not the path of progress followed
by a mind that is learning. The former may describe a uniform straightway
course, the latter must be a series of tacks, of zigzag movements back and
forth. In short, the formal steps indicate the points that should be
covered by the teacher in preparing to conduct a recitation, but should not
prescribe the actual course of teaching.
  (204) events, (ii) ideas and reasonings, and (iii) application of their
result to specific facts. In each case, the movement is inductive-
deductive. We are struck also by one difference: the Herbartian method
makes no reference to a difficulty, a discrepancy requiring explanation, as
the origin and stimulus of the whole process. As a consequence, it often
seems as if the Herbartian method deals with thought simply as an incident
in the process of acquiring information, instead of treating the latter as
an incident in the process of developing thought.
  The formal steps concern the teacher's preparation rather than the
recitation itself
  Before following up this comparison in more detail, we may raise the
question whether the recitation should, in any case, follow a uniform
prescribed series of steps ― even if it be admitted that this series
expresses the normal logical order. In reply, it may be said that just
because the order is logical, it represents the survey of subject-matter
made by one who already understands it, not the path of progress followed
by a mind that is learning. The former may describe a uniform straightway
course, the latter must be a series of tacks, of zigzag movements back and
forth. In short, the formal steps indicate the points that should be
covered by the teacher in preparing to conduct a recitation, but should not
prescribe the actual course of teaching.
  The teacher's problem
  Lack of any preparation on the part of a teacher leads, of course, to a
random, haphazard recitation, its success depending on the inspiration of
the moment, which may or may not come. Preparation in simply the subject-
matter conduces to a rigid order, the teacher examining pupils on their
exact knowledge of their text. But the teacher's problem-as a teacher-does
not reside in mastering a subject-matter, but in adjusting a subject-matter
to the nurture of thought Now the
[pic]
(205) formal steps indicate excellently well the questions a teacher should
ask in working out the problem of teaching a topic. What preparation have
my pupils for attacking this subject ? What familiar experiences of theirs
are available ? What have they already learned that will come to their
assistance? How shall I present the matter so as to fit economically and
effectively into their present equipment ? What pictures shall I show ? To
what objects shall I call their attention ? What incidents shall I relate ?
What comparisons shall I lead them to draw, what similarities to recognize?
What is the general principle toward which the whole discussion should
point as its conclusion? By what applications shall I try to fix, to clear
up, and to make real their grasp of this general principle ? What
activities of their own may bring it home to them as a genuinely
significant principle ?
  Only flexibility of procedure gives a recitation vitality
  No teacher can f ail to teach better if he has considered such questions
somewhat systematically. But the more the teacher has reflected upon
pupils' probable intellectual response to a topic from the various
standpoints indicated by the five formal steps, the more he will be
prepared to conduct the recitation in a flexible and free way, and yet not
let the subject go to pieces and the pupils' attention drift in all
directions; the less necessary will he find it, in order to preserve a
semblance of intellectual order, to follow some one uniform scheme. He will
be ready to take advantage of any sign of vital response that shows itself
from any direction. One pupil may already have some inkling ― probably
erroneous ― of a general principle. Application may then come at the very
beginning in order to show that the principle will not work, and thereby
[pic]
  Any step may come first
  (206) induce search for new facts and a new generalization. Or the abrupt
presentation of some fact or object may so stimulate the minds of pupils as
to render quite superfluous any preliminary preparation. If pupils' minds
are at work at all, it is quite impossible that they should wait until the
teacher has conscientiously taken them through the steps of preparation,
presentation, and comparison before they form at least a working hypothesis
or generalization. Moreover, unless comparison of the familiar and the
unfamiliar is introduced at the beginning, both preparation and
presentation will be aimless and without logical motive, isolated, and in
so far meaningless. The student's mind cannot be prepared at large, but
only for something in particular, and presentation is usually the best way
of evoking associations. The emphasis may fall now on the familiar concept
that will help grasp the new, now on the new facts that frame the problem;
but in either case it is comparison and contrast with the other term of the
pair which gives either its force. In short, to transfer the logical steps
from the points that the teacher needs to consider to uniform successive
steps in the conduct of a recitation, is to impose the logical review of a
mind that already understands the subject, upon the mind that is struggling
to comprehend it, and thereby to obstruct the logic of the student's own
mind.
                                          ? 2. The Factors in the Recitation
  Bearing in mind that the formal steps represent intertwined factors of a
student's progress and not mileposts on a beaten highway, we may consider
each by itself. In so doing, it will be convenient to follow the example of
many of the Herbartians and reduce the steps to
[pic]
(207) three: first, the apprehension of specific or particular facts;
second, rational generalization; third, application and verification.
  Preparation is getting the sense of the problem
  I. The processes having to do with particular facts are preparation and
presentation. The best, indeed the only preparation is arousal to a
perception of something that needs explanation, something unexpected,
puzzling, peculiar. When the feeling of a genuine perplexity lays hold of
any mind (no matter how the feeling arises), that mind is alert and
inquiring, because stimulated from within. The shock, the bite, of a
question will force the mind to go wherever it is capable of going, better
than will the most ingenious pedagogical devices unaccompanied by this
mental ardor. It is the sense of a problem that forces the mind to a survey
and recall of the past to discover what the question means and how it may
be dealt with.
  Pitfalls in preparation
  The teacher in his more deliberate attempts to call into play the familiar
elements in a student's experience, must guard against certain dangers. (i)
The step of preparation must not be too long continued or too exhaustive,
or it defeats its own end. The pupil loses interest and is bored, when a
plunge in medias res might have braced him to his work. The preparation
part of the recitation period of some conscientious teachers reminds one of
the boy who takes so long a run in order to gain headway for a jump that
when he reaches the line, he is too tired to jump far. (ii) The organs by
which we apprehend new material are our habits. To insist too minutely upon
turning over habitual dispositions into conscious ideas is to interfere
with their best workings. Some factors of familiar experience must indeed
be brought to conscious recognition, just as trans-
[pic]
(208)-planting is necessary for the best growth of some plants. But it is
fatal to be forever digging up either experiences or plants to see how they
are getting along. Constraint, self-consciousness, embarrassment, are the
consequence of too much conscious refurbishing of familiar experiences.
  Statement of aim of lesson
  Strict Herbartians generally lay it down that statement ― by the teacher ―
of the aim of a lesson is an indispensable part of preparation. This
preliminary statement of the aim of the lesson hardly seems more
intellectual in character, however, than tapping a bell or giving any other
signal for attention and transfer of thoughts from diverting subjects. To
the teacher the statement of an end is significant, because he has already
been at the end; from a pupil's standpoint the statement of what he is
going to learn is something of an Irish bull. If the statement of the aim
is taken too seriously by the instructor, as meaning more than a signal to
attention, its probable result is forestalling the pupil's own reaction,
relieving him of the responsibility of developing a problem and thus
arresting his mental initiative.
  How much the teacher should tell or show
  It is unnecessary to discuss at length presentation as a factor in the
recitation, because our last chapter covered the topic under the captions
of observation and communication. The function of presentation is to supply
materials that force home the nature of a problem and furnish suggestions
for dealing with it. The practical problem of the teacher is to preserve a
balance between so little showing and telling as to fail to stimulate
reflection and to much as to choke thought. Provided the student is
genuinely engaged upon a topic, and provided the teacher is willing to give
the student a good deal of leeway as to what he assimilates and retains
(not requiring rigidly that everything be grasped or repro-
[pic]
(209)-duced), there is comparatively little danger that one who is himself
enthusiastic will communicate too much concerning a topic.
  The pupil's responsibility for making out a reasonable case
  II. The distinctively rational phase of reflective inquiry consists, as we
have already seen, in the elaboration of an idea, or working hypothesis,
through conjoint comparison and contrast, terminating in definition or
formulation. (i) So far as the recitation is concerned, the primary
requirement is that the student be held responsible for working out
mentally every suggested principle so as to show what he means by it, how
it bears upon the facts at hand, and how the facts bear upon it. Unless the
pupil is made responsible for developing on his own account the
reasonableness of the guess he puts forth, the recitation counts for
practically nothing in the training of reasoning power. A clever teacher
easily acquires great skill in dropping out the inept and senseless
contributions of pupils, and in selecting and emphasizing those in line
with the result he wishes to reach. But this method (sometimes called
"suggestive questioning ") relieves the pupils of intellectual
responsibility, save for acrobatic agility in following the teacher's lead.
  How much the teacher should tell or show
  It is unnecessary to discuss at length presentation as a factor in the
recitation, because our last chapter covered the topic under the captions
of observation and communication. The function of presentation is to supply
materials that force home the nature of a problem and furnish suggestions
for dealing with it. The practical problem of the teacher is to preserve a
balance between so little showing and telling as to fail to stimulate
reflection and to much as to choke thought. Provided the student is
genuinely engaged upon a topic, and provided the teacher is willing to give
the student a good deal of leeway as to what he assimilates and retains
(not requiring rigidly that everything be grasped or repro-
[pic]
(209)-duced), there is comparatively little danger that one who is himself
enthusiastic will communicate too much concerning a topic.
  The pupil's responsibility for making out a reasonable case
  II. The distinctively rational phase of reflective inquiry consists, as we
have already seen, in the elaboration of an idea, or working hypothesis,
through conjoint comparison and contrast, terminating in definition or
formulation. (i) So far as the recitation is concerned, the primary
requirement is that the student be held responsible for working out
mentally every suggested principle so as to show what he means by it, how
it bears upon the facts at hand, and how the facts bear upon it. Unless the
pupil is made responsible for developing on his own account the
reasonableness of the guess he puts forth, the recitation counts for
practically nothing in the training of reasoning power. A clever teacher
easily acquires great skill in dropping out the inept and senseless
contributions of pupils, and in selecting and emphasizing those in line
with the result he wishes to reach. But this method (sometimes called
"suggestive questioning ") relieves the pupils of intellectual
responsibility, save for acrobatic agility in following the teacher's lead.
  The necessity for mental leisure
  (ii) The working over of a vague and more or less casual idea into
coherent and definite form is impossible without a pause, without freedom
from distraction. We say "Stop and think "; well, all reflection involves,
at some point, stopping external observations and reactions- so that an
idea may mature. Meditation, withdrawal or abstraction from clamorous
assailants of the senses and from demands for overt action, is as necessary
at the reasoning stage, as are observation and experiment at other periods.
The metaphors of digestion and
[pic]
(210) assimilation, that so readily occur to mind in connection with
rational elaboration, are highly instructive. A silent, uninterrupted
working-over of considerations by comparing and weighing alternative
suggestions, is indispensable for the development of coherent and compact
conclusions. Reasoning is no more akin to disputing or arguing, or to the
abrupt seizing and dropping of suggestions, than digestion is to a noisy
champing of the jaws. The teacher must secure opportunity for leisurely
mental digestion.
  A typical central object necessary
  (iii) In the process of comparison, the teacher must avert the distraction
that ensues from putting before the mind a number of facts on the same
level of importance. Since attention is selective, some one object normally
claims thought and furnishes the center of departure and reference. This
fact is fatal to the success of the pedagogical methods that endeavor to
conduct comparison on the basis of putting before the mind a row of objects
of equal importance. In comparing, the mind does not naturally begin with
objects a, b, c, d, and try to find the respect in which they agree. It
begins with a single object or situation more or less vague and inchoate in
meaning, and makes excursions to other objects in order to render
understanding of the central object consistent and clear. The mere
multiplication of objects of comparison is adverse to successful reasoning.
Each fact brought within the field of comparison should clear up some
obscure feature or extend some fragmentary trait of the primary object.
[pic]
  Importance of types
  In short, pains should be taken to see that the object on which thought
centers is typical: material being typical when, although individual or
specific, it is such as readily and fruitfully suggests the principles of
an en-
[pic]
(211) -tire class of facts. No sane person begins to think about rivers
wholesale or at large. He begins with the one river that has presented some
puzzling trait. Then he studies other rivers to get light upon the baffling
features of this one, and at the same time he employs the characteristic
traits of his original object to reduce to order the multifarious details
that appear in connection with other rivers. This working back and forth
pre. serves unity of meaning, while protecting it from monotony and
narrowness. Contrast, unlikeness, throws significant features into relief,
and these become instruments for binding together into an organized or
coherent meaning dissimilar characters. The mind is de. fended against the
deadening influence of many isolated particulars and also against the
barrenness of a merely formal principle. Particular cases and properties
supply emphasis and concreteness; general principles convert the
particulars into a single system.
  All insight into meaning effects generalization
  (iv) Hence generalization is not a separate and single act; it is rather a
constant tendency and function of the entire discussion or recitation.
Every step forward toward an idea that comprehends, that explains, that
unites what was isolated and therefore puzzling, generalizes. The little
child generalizes as truly as the adolescent or adult, even though he does
not arrive at the same generalities. If he is studying a river basin, his
knowledge is generalized in so far as the various details that he
apprehends are found to be the effects of a single force, as that of water
pushing downward from gravity, or are seen to be successive stages of a
single history of formation. Even if there were acquaintance with only one
river, knowledge of it under such conditions would be generalized
knowledge.
[pic]
(212)
  Insight into meaning requires formulation
  The factor of formulation, of conscious stating, involved in
generalization, should also be a constant function, not a single formal
act. Definition means essentially the growth of a meaning out of vagueness
into definiteness. Such final verbal definition as takes place should be
only the culmination of a steady growth in distinctness. In the reaction
against ready-made verbal definitions and rules, the pendulum should never
swing to the opposite extreme, that of neglecting to summarize the net
meaning that emerges from dealing with particular facts. Only as general
summaries are made from time to time does the mind reach a conclusion or a
resting place; and only as conclusions are reached is there an intellectual
deposit available in future understanding.
  Generalization means capacity for application to the new
  III. As the last words indicate, application and generalization lie close
together. Mechanical skill for further use may be achieved without any
explicit recognition of a principle; nay, in routine and narrow technical
matters, conscious formulation may be a hindrance. But without recognition
of a principle, without generalization, the power gained cannot be
transferred to new and dissimilar matters. The inherent significance of
generalization is that it frees a meaning from local restrictions; rather,
generalization is meaning so freed; it is meaning emancipated from
accidental features so as to be available in new cases. The surest test for
detecting a spurious generalization (a statement general in verbal form but
not accompanied by discernment of meaning), i's the failure of the so-
called principle spontaneously to extend itself. The essence of the general
is application. (Ante, p. 29.)
  Fossilized versus flexibible principles
  The true purpose of exercises that apply rules and principles is, then,
not so much to drive or drill them
[pic]
(213) in as to give adequate insight into an idea or principle. To treat
application as a separate final step is disastrous. In every judgment some
meaning is employed as a basis for estimating and interpreting some fact;
by this application the meaning is itself enlarged and tested. When the
general meaning is regarded as .complete in itself, application is treated
as an external, non-intellectual use to which, for practical purposes
alone, it is advisable to put the meaning. The principle is one self-
contained thing; its use is another and independent thing. When this
divorce occurs, principles become fossilized and rigid; they lose their
inherent vitality, their self-impelling power.
  Self-application a mark of genuine principles
  A true conception is a moving idea, and it seeks outlet, or application to
the interpretation of particulars and the guidance of action, as naturally
as water runs downhill. In fine, just as reflective thought requires
particular facts of observation and events of action for its origination,
so it also requires particular facts and deeds for its own consummation. "
Glittering generalities " are inert because they are spurious. Application
is as much an intrinsic part of genuine reflective inquiry as is alert
observation or reasoning itself. Truly general principles tend to apply
themselves. The teacher needs, indeed, to supply conditions favorable to
use and exercise; but something is wrong when artificial tasks have
arbitrarily to be invented in order to secure application for principles.
                                                                       Notes
  No notes
                                        Chapter 16: Some General Conclusions
  WE shall conclude our survey of how we think and how we should think by
presenting some factors of thinking which should balance each other, but
which constantly tend to become so isolated that they work against each
other instead of cooperating to make reflective inquiry efficient.
                                      ? I. The Unconscious and the Conscious
The understood as the unconsciously assumed
  It is significant that one meaning of the term understood is something so
thoroughly mastered, so completely agreed upon, as to be assumed; that is
to say, taken as a matter of course without explicit statement. The
familiar "goes without saying" means "it is understood." If two persons can
converse intelligently with each other, it is because a common experience
supplies a background of mutual understanding upon which their respective
remarks are projected. To dig up and to formulate this common background
would be imbecile; it is " understood"; that is, it is silently sup-plied
and implied as the taken-for-granted medium of intelligent exchange of
ideas.
  Inquiry as conscious formulation
  If, however, the two persons find themselves at cross purposes, it is
necessary to dig up and compare the presuppositions, the implied context,
on the basis of which each is speaking. The implicit is made ex-plicit;
what was unconsciously assumed is exposed to the light of conscious day. In
this way, the root of the misunder-
[pic]
(215)-standing is removed. Some such rhythm of the unconscious and the
conscious is involved in all fruitful thinking. A person in pursuing a
consecutive train of thoughts takes some system of ideas for granted (which
accordingly he leaves unexpressed, " unconscious ") as surely as he does in
conversing with others. Some context, some situation, some controlling
purpose dominates his explicit ideas so thoroughly that it does not need to
be consciously formulated and expounded. Explicit thinking goes on within
the limits of what is implied or understood. Yet the fact that reflection
originates in a problem makes it necessary at some points consciously to
inspect and examine this familiar background. We have to turn upon some
unconscious assumption and make it explicit.
  Rules cannot be given for attaining a balance
  No rules can be laid down for attaining the due balance and rhythm of
these two phases of mental life. No ordinance pan prescribe at just what
point the spontaneous working of some unconscious attitude and habit is to
be checked till we have made explicit what is implied in it. No one can
tell in detail just how far the analytic inspection and formulation are to
be carried. We can say that they must be carried far enough so that the
individual will know what he is about and be able to guide his thinking;
but in a given case just how far is that? We can say that they must be
carried far enough to detect and guard against the source of some false
perception or reasoning, and to get a leverage on the investigation; but
such statements only restate the original difficulty. Since our reliance
must be upon the disposition and tact of the individual in the particular
case, there is no test of the success of an education more important than
the extent to which it nurtures a type of mind competent to
[pic]
  (216) maintain an economical balance of the unconscious and the conscious.
  The over-analytic to be avoided
  The ways of teaching criticised in the foregoing pages as false "analytic
" methods of instruction (ante, P. 112), all reduce themselves to the
mistake of directing explicit attention and formulation to what would work
better if left an unconscious attitude and working assumption. To pry into
the familiar, the usual, the automatic, simply for the sake of making it
conscious, simply f or the sake of formulating it, is both an impertinent
interference, and a source of boredom. To be forced to dwell consciously
upon the accustomed is the essence of ennui; to pursue methods of
instruction that have that tendency is deliberately to cultivate lack of
interest.
  The detection of error, the clinching of truth, demand conscious statement
  On the other hand, what has been said in criticism of merely routine forms
of skill, what has been said about the importance of having a genuine
problem, of introducing the novel, and of reaching a deposit of general
meaning weighs on the other side of the scales. It is as fatal to good
thinking to fail to make conscious the standing source of some error or
failure as it is to pry needlessly into what works smoothly. To over-
simplify, to exclude the novel for the sake of prompt skill, to avoid
obstacles for the sake of averting errors, is as detrimental as to try to
get pupils to formulate everything they know and to state every step of the
process employed in getting a result. Where the shoe pinches, analytic
examination is indicated. When a topic is to be clinched so that knowledge
of it will carry over into an effective resource in further topics,
conscious condensation and summarizing are imperative. In the early stage
of acquaintance with a subject, a good deal of unconstrained unconscious
mental play about it may be
[pic]
(217) permitted, even at the risk of some random experimenting; in the
later stages, conscious formulation and review may be encouraged.
Projection and reflection, going directly ahead and turning back in
scrutiny, should alternate. Unconsciousness gives spontaneity and
freshness; consciousness, conviction and control.
                                                    ? 2. Process and Product
  Play and work again
  A like balance in mental life characterizes process and product. We met
one important phase of this adjustment in considering play and work. In
play, interest centers in activity, without much reference to its outcome.
The sequence of deeds, images, emotions, suffices on its own account. In
work, the end holds attention and controls the notice given to means. Since
the difference is one of direction of interest, the contrast is one of
emphasis, not of cleavage. When comparative prominence in consciousness of
activity or outcome is transformed into isolation of one from the other,
play degenerates into fooling, and work into drudgery.
  Play and work again
  A like balance in mental life characterizes process and product. We met
one important phase of this adjustment in considering play and work. In
play, interest centers in activity, without much reference to its outcome.
The sequence of deeds, images, emotions, suffices on its own account. In
work, the end holds attention and controls the notice given to means. Since
the difference is one of direction of interest, the contrast is one of
emphasis, not of cleavage. When comparative prominence in consciousness of
activity or outcome is transformed into isolation of one from the other,
play degenerates into fooling, and work into drudgery.
  Play should not be fooling
  By " fooling" we understand a series of disconnected temporary overflows
of energy dependent upon whim and accident. When all reference to outcome
is eliminated from the sequence of ideas and acts that make play, each
member of the sequence is cut loose from every other and becomes fantastic,
arbitrary, aimless; mere fooling follows. There is some inveterate tendency
to fool in children as well as in animals; nor is the tendency wholly evil,
for at least it militates against falling into ruts. But when it is
excessive in amount, dissipation and disintegration follow; and the only
way of preventing this consequence is to make regard for results enter into
even the freest play activity.
[pic]
  nor work, drudgery
(218)
  Exclusive interest in the result alters work to drudgery. For by drudgery
is meant those activities in which the interest in the outcome does not
suffuse the means of getting the result. Whenever a piece of work becomes
drudgery, the process of doing loses all value for the doer; he cares
solely for what is to be had at the end of it. The work itself, the putting
forth of energy, is hateful; it is just a necessary evil, since without it
some important end would be missed. Now it is a commonplace that in the
work of the world many things have to be done the doing of which is not
intrinsically very interesting. However, the argument that children should
be kept doing drudgery-tasks because thereby they acquire power to be
faithful to distasteful duties, is wholly fallacious. Repulsion, shirking,
and evasion are the consequences of having the repulsive imposed ― not
loyal love of duty. Willingness to work for ends by means of acts not
naturally attractive is best attained by securing such an appreciation of
the value of the end that a sense of its value is transferred to its means
of accomplishment. Not interesting in themselves, they borrow interest from
the result with which they are associated.
  Balance of playfulness and seriousness the intellectual ideal
  The intellectual harm accruing from divorce of work and play, product and
process, is evidenced in the proverb, " All work and no play makes Jack a
dull boy." That the obverse is true is perhaps sufficiently signalized in
the fact that fooling is so near to foolishness. To be playful and serious
at the same time is possible, and it defines the ideal mental condition.
Absence of dogmatism and prejudice, presence of intellectual curiosity and
flexibility, are manifest in the free play of the mind upon a topic. To
give the mind this
[pic]
  Free play of mind
  (219) free play is not to encourage toying with a subject, but is to be
interested in the unfolding of the subject on its own account, apart from
its subservience to a preconceived belief or habitual aim. Mental play is
open-mindedness, faith in the power of thought to preserve its own
integrity without external supports and arbitrary restrictions. Hence free
mental play involves seriousness, the earnest following of the development
of subject-matter. It is incompatible with carelessness or flippancy, for
it exacts accurate noting of every result reached in order that every
conclusion may be put to further use. What is termed the interest in truth
for its own sake is certainly a serious matter, yet this pure interest in
truth coincides with love of the free play of thought.
  is normal in childhood
  In spite of many appearances to the contrary ― usually due to social
conditions of either undue superfluity that induces idle fooling or undue
economic pressure that compels drudgery ― childhood normally realizes the
ideal of conjoint free mental play and thoughtfulness. Successful
portrayals of children have always made their wistful intentness at least
as obvious as their lack of worry f or the morrow. To live in the present
is compatible with condensation of far-reaching meanings in the present.
Such enrichment of the present for its own sake is the just heritage of
childhood and the best insurer of future growth. The child forced into
premature concern with economic remote results may develop a surprising
sharpening of wits in a particular direction, but this precocious
specialization is always paid for by later apathy and dullness.
  The attitude of the artist
  That art originated in play is a common saying. Whether or not the saying
is historically correct, it
[pic]
(220) suggests that harmony of mental playfulness and seriousness describes
the artistic ideal. When the artist is preoccupied overmuch with means and
material he may achieve wonderful technique, but not. the artistic spirit
par excellence. When the animating idea is in excess of the command of
method, aesthetic feeling may be indicated, but the art of presentation is
too defective to express the feeling thoroughly. When the thought of the
end becomes so adequate that it compels translation into the means that
embody it, or when attention to means is inspired by recognition of the end
they serve, we have the attitude typical of the artist, an attitude that
may be displayed in all activities, even though not conventionally
designated arts.
  The art of the teacher culminates in nurturing this attitude
  That teaching is an art and the true teacher an artist is a familiar
saying. Now the teacher's own claim to rank as an artist is measured by his
ability to foster the attitude of the artist in those who study with him,
whether they be youth or little children. Some succeed in arousing
enthusiasm, in communicating large ideas, in evoking energy. So far, well;
but the final test is whether the stimulus thus given to wider aims
succeeds in transforming itself into power, that is to say, into the
attention to detail that ensures mastery over means of execution. If not,
the zeal flags, the interest dies out, the ideal becomes a clouded memory.
Other teachers succeed in training facility, skill, mastery of the
technique of subjects. Again it is well ― so far. But unless enlargement of
mental vision, power of increased discrimination of final values, a sense
for ideas―for principles―accompanies this training, forms of skill ready to
be put indifferently to any end may be the result. Such modes of technical
skill may display themselves, accord-
[pic]
(221)-ing to circumstances, as cleverness in serving self-interest, as
docility in carrying out the purposes of others, or as unimaginative
plodding in ruts. To nurture inspiring aim and executive means into harmony
with each other is at once the difficulty and the reward of the teacher.
                                                   ? 3. The Far and the Near
  Familiarity breeds contempt,
  Teachers who have heard that they should avoid matters foreign to pupils'
experience, are frequently surprised to find pupils wake up when something
beyond their ken is introduced, while they remain apathetic in considering
the familiar. In geography, the child upon the plains seems perversely
irresponsive to the intellectual charms of his local environment, and
fascinated by whatever concerns mountains or the sea. Teachers who have
struggled with little avail to extract from pupils essays describing the
details of things with which they are well acquainted, sometimes find them
eager to write on lofty or imaginary themes. A woman of education, who has
recorded her experience as a factory worker, tried retelling Little Women
to some factory girls during their working hours. They cared little for it,
saying, "Those girls had no more interesting experience than we have," and
demanded stories of millionaires and society leaders. A man interested in
the mental condition of those engaged in routine labor asked a Scotch girl
in a cotton factory what she thought about all day. She replied that as
soon as her mind was free from starting the machinery, she married a duke,
and their fortunes occupied her for the remainder of the day.
  Naturally, these incidents are not told in order to encourage methods of
teaching that appeal to the sensa-
[pic]
  since only the novel demands attention,
  (222)-tional, the extraordinary, or the incomprehensible. They are told,
however, to enforce the point that the familiar and the near do not excite
or repay thought on their own account, but only as they are adjusted to
mastering the strange and remote. It is a commonplace of psychology that we
do not attend to the old nor consciously mind that to which we are
thoroughly accustomed. For this, there is good reason: to devote attention
to the old, when new circumstances are constantly arising to which we
should adjust ourselves, would be wasteful and dangerous. Thought must be
reserved for the new, the precarious, the problematic. Hence the mental
constraint, the sense of being lost, that comes to pupils when they are
invited to turn their thoughts upon that with which they are already
familiar. The old, the near, the accustomed, is not that to which but that
with which we attend; it does not furnish the material of a problem, but of
its solution.
  which, in turn, can be given only through the old
  The last sentence has brought us to the balancing of new and old, of the
far and that close by, involved in reflection. The more remote supplies the
stimulus and the motive; the nearer at hand furnishes the point of approach
and the available resources. This principle may also be stated in this
form: the best thinking occurs when the easy and the difficult are duly
proportioned to each other. The easy and the familiar are equivalents, as
are the strange and the difficult. Too much that is easy gives no ground
for inquiry; too much of the hard renders inquiry hopeless.
  The given and the suggested
  The necessity of the interaction of the near and the far follows directly
from the nature of thinking. Where there is thought, something present
suggests and indicates something absent. Accordingly unless the familiar
[pic]
(223) is presented under conditions that are in some respect unusual, it
gives no jog to thinking, it makes no demand upon what is not present in
order to be understood. And if the subject presented is totally strange,
there is no basis upon which it may suggest anything serviceable for its
comprehension. When a person first has to do with fractions, for example,
they will be wholly baffling so far as they do not signify to him some
relation that he has already mastered in dealing with whole numbers. When
fractions have become thoroughly familiar, his perception of them acts
simply as a signal to do certain things; they are a "substitute sign," to
which he can react without. thinking. (Ante, p. 178.) If, nevertheless, the
situation as a whole presents something novel and hence uncertain, the
entire response is not mechanical, because this mechanical operation is put
to use in solving a problem. There is no end to this spiral process:
foreign subject-matter transformed through thinking into a familiar
possession becomes a resource for judging and assimilating additional
foreign subject-matter.
  Observation supplies the near, imagination the remote
  The need for both imagination and observation in every mental enterprise
illustrates another aspect of the same principle. Teachers who have tried
object-lessons of the conventional type have usually found that when the
lessons were new, pupils were attracted to them as a diversion, but as soon
as they became matters of course they were as dull and wearisome as was
ever the most mechanical study of mere symbols. Imagination could not play
about the objects so as to enrich them. The feeling that instruction in
"facts, facts" produces a narrow Grading is justified not because facts in
themselves are limiting, but because facts are dealt out
[pic]
(224) as such hard and fast ready-made articles as to leave no room to
imagination. Let the facts be presented so as to stimulate imagination, and
culture ensues naturally enough. The converse is equally true. The
imaginative is not necessarily the imaginary; that is, the unreal. The
proper function of imagination is vision of realities that cannot be
exhibited under existing conditions of sense-perception. Clear insight into
the remote, the absent, the obscure is its aim. History, literature, and
geography, the principles of science, nay, even geometry and arithmetic,
are full of matters that must be imaginatively realized if they are
realized at all. Imagination supplements and deepens observation; only when
it turns into the fanciful does it become a substitute for observation and
lose logical force.
  Experience through communication of other's experience
  A final exemplification of the required balance between near and far is
found in the relation that obtains between the narrower field of experience
realized in an individual's own contact with persons and things, and the
wider experience of the race that may become his through communication.
Instruction always runs the risk of swamping the pupil's own vital, though
narrow, experience under masses of communicated material. The instructor
ceases and the teacher begins at the point where communicated matter
stimulates into fuller and more significant life that which has entered by
the strait and narrow gate of sense-perception and motor activity. Genuine
communication involves contagion; its name should not be taken in vain by
terming communication that which produces no community of thought and
purpose between the child and the race of which he is the heir.
                                                                       Notes
  No notes

